SchoolFamily.com's guest blogger this week is Neil McNerney, M.Ed., LPC , author of Homework-A Parent's Guide To Helping Out Without Freaking Out! You know the look. It's the look your kid gives whe... Read more
National standards have set the bar for academic achievement, which means that today it is clear what a student should have achieved by certain points in the school year. Parent teacher conferences are a terrific opportunity ... Read more
File this under the category of: What the heck were they thinking? Last week, education officials at an elementary school in Seattle, WA, sent a letter home to parents of children at the school, advising them of a new limit i... Read more
Will my daughter know how to buy her lunch? What if my son's not reading yet? Will my shy child develop friends in the class? Understandably, parents have questions and concerns when their young child starts school. ... Read more
How does my child get along with other children? Is my son getting better at following verbal instructions for in-class assignments? My daughter aces her spelling tests, then turns around and mis-spells the words the next day... Read more
When parents and schools work together, children benefit. According to a report from the Southwest Educational Development Laboratory, "When schools, families, and community groups work together to support learning, children ... Read more
I was talking to a friend yesterday whose oldest child is in kindergarten. She was telling me that she just sent in the form for her daughter's parent-teacher conference and that she was nervous -- despite the fact her ... Read more
What's your perception of your school's PTO or PTA group? Do you think it's friendly and hardworking... or cliquey and unwelcoming? If you said the latter, you are not alone.Connecticut mom, Monica, felt that way about the PT... Read more
A good "Parent-Teacher" relationship is an integral part of your child's school success.Parents are often unsure of how to approach their child's teacher. Teachers welcome input and help from parents, ... Read more
This Miami Herald brings up some really interesting issues around school involvement and family policies fr our businesses. I'm conflicted. I'm a huuuuge involvement fan and the love the thought of more parents at schoo... Read more