Parents - Do You Know What Your Kids Are Texting?
Talbot Partnership for Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse Prevention is encouraging parents to understand what their kids are texting. In many cases, parents will be shocked that these texts deal with activities involving alcohol, drugs and sex.
New research from the Partnership for a Drug-Free America shows that a third of parents are concerned computers and texting make it harder to communicate with media-engrossed teens about sex, drugs, alcohol and other risky behaviors. This is a particular concern for many parents, especially considering another new report, from the National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, finds 5.7 million public school students attend gang and drug-infected schools.
To help parents detect when their children are discussing dangerous activities, noslang.com was created in 2005, This website has become a valuable educational tool for parents to learn about what their children are up to. In this online dictionary, there are thousands of slang terms related to drugs and sex. Whether you're a parent, teacher, law enforcement officer or simply a concerned friend - it's important to stay up to date on the latest drug-related slang terms.
To demystify electronic communications among teens, Talbot Partnership suggests keeping an eye on your child's texts and online communications, whether it's via instant messages or Facebook. According to a recent study from the Pew Research Center's Internet & American Life Project, 64 percent of parents look at the contents of their child's cell phone. Looking at what your child says online could keep your child out of a dangerous situation.
For more tips on parenting substance-free youth, visit www.talbotpartnership.org. Parents may also sign up on the website for Talbot Partnership's E-Newsletter, which also offers tips for parents.
The Update
Shoreupdate.com is brought to you by The Update. The Update is direct mailed to more than 17,000 homes in Queen Anne's County. For more information or for advertising rates, please visit our advertising page .