So there's reading and there's still writing, but in the 1990's, there's always urinalysis. Norfolk High School is one of two schools in the state starting voluntary drug testing. It will be in effect year round. [Randy Nelson, Supt. Norfolk Public Schools] That's where we all agreed that some type of testing would be something that we felt could hold them accountable. Randy Nelson is superintendent of Norfolk Public Schools. [Nelson] As we did surveys with parents, surveys with kids, they're telling us if you're going to do this, open it to everybody. So again, with the law, the only way we can open it up for all students is to do a voluntary program. A poll showed that Norfolk citizens supported drug testing. 67% of those polled favored testing students for marijuana and other drugs. 65% favored alcohol testing. Most thought testing would discourage drug use. $1,500 and six months later, school officials believe they have their answer, drug testing. [Steve Morton] For those of you who may not know me, I am Steve Morton. And then lots of parents backed away from the idea. The school held a meeting to discuss the plan, but most parents we talked to said their children have issues with neither drugs nor alcohol. They've given a polite thanks but no thanks to the school. [Dale Primrose, Parent] If I begin to suspect in any way that there was a problem with my daughter or her immediate group, I don't expect the school to handle it for me. At Norfolk, only 10th through 12th graders are tested, in part because of money. The other reason is the older kids may be more likely to experiment. Parents signed waivers like this one saying they want their kids tested for drugs. Norfolk has discovered the influence kids have other parents in matters like these. [Student] They didn't sign the drug and alcohol test. Why? Because I told them not to. I drink. [2Nd student] Your parents pretty much know you're going to do it so they don't want to get you in trouble. They know you're going to drink so they don't want to give you a drug and alcohol test because they know you might get caught and you will get in trouble for sports in school. School officials say there would not be a problem if drugs and alcohol were not easily accessible. [Steve Morton, Norfolk High Principal] I think the availability is the problem maybe more than we can actually say the percentages. I think the kids have pretty much told us it's readily available. They told us, too. [2Nd student] If you want it, you can get it. Take 5-10 minutes to get it if you want it. Do most people's parents think that they get alcohol and drugs? A lot of them don't. Pretty much everybody's parents know if you're drinking or not. School officials stress, very few kids have problems with drugs and alcohol, casual use and otherwise. But the number of those who have decided to use has gone up. [Morton] We have had parents who actually think it's okay to put on the parties because the kids are in a confined area. They know where they are. They're safer there. Not knowing whether any kids are alcoholics or some of them slip out the back door and drive home. We have the whole gamut. Defining a problem really becomes the issue. Even with numbers, it's difficult to draw conclusions. According to the Norfolk Police Department, the numbers tend to be relatively consistent as far as arrests are concerned. In 1995, 64 kids were arrested for being in possession of alcohol. In 1996, it was a third of that. Considering numbers up to August of this year, M.I.P. arrests are keeping pace with the relatively higher risk numbers in 1995. Thus far this year, the U.I.'s are also peaking. Drug and narcotic violations are also on pace. [Morton] In the 1980's it was more drinking. Now as you get to the 1990's, I think the drug use is up. Drinking is still there. But actually as the kids say, marijuana is cheaper. It's easier to get. Methamphetamines, I think, are growing. We have had information from law enforcement that it's available around here a little more than it was last year, and we have some kids that may be on it. Most are not, but for those who are, schools are taking some seemingly desperate measures. Omaha School District 66 used drug sniffing dogs last year to find contra band. There were no strikes by the way. Only an old package of Twinkies. This school year Westside, too, has implemented voluntary drug testing. They have very careful not to call it a program, but they admit there is a problem. The school even maintains statistics to show it. [Dick Lundquist, District 66 Guidance Counselor] The data that we received would show, for instance, in our 12th grade class, almost 20% of the students were classified as high usage. They would truly be part of the drug culture. With 1/5th of students using drugs, the community would be shocked, right? Not according to Lundquist. He says the community is almost numb to it. About 20% of the students in grades 7 through 12 are participating in drug testing. Lundquist says the effort is still a success. [Lundquist] So what were we wanting to have happen? We were wanting kids to talk to their parents about usage, about substance usage. We're positive that that has happened. For many of the students -- we have talked to students and parents -- who chose not to include their youngster in the random testing. But my first question was did you talk about it and it was always yes, I did. [Doug Brown] I kind of am glad that our school board is doing what they're doing because I think they're just taking a stand. Good morning, scholars how are we doing today? Back to Norfolk. When the school board took a stand, Doug Brown was behind board members. He is a teacher at Norfolk High with a daughter in his class. Doug and Lindsay went into negotiations as soon as the drug policy was unveiled. Lindsay is against the policy. [Lindsay Brown] I don't want to go to the hassle, if he trusts me, because the people that I think it would become useful to is people who don't trust their kids, who can't get the truth out of them, who don't know what's going on in their lives and stuff, but he knows what's going on in my life and we have 100% trust so it's not really something that will be valuable to me personally or to my parents really.
But dad is still not convinced. He wants to consider backing the program regardless of how much he trusts his daughter. [Doug Brown Teacher Norfolk High] You know, if she is definitely set against it and so forth, I can respect that. I'm not just totally strong one way or the other. I think it's a good program we're implementing. That's kind of why I wanted to sign her up just to support the school, support the board, let them know I am concerned as well. It's very simple, again. Mom and dad have to take the bull by the horns and do a better job, I think. Both schools say they wanted to start dialogues between parents and kids. They're talking about it, but according to Westside School paper reporter Michael Peck not much substantive has come from discussions. He believes the test is a violation of personal rights but moreover that it is cutting into the family's territory. [Michael Peck] I think you need a real counseling approach and you need to provide individuals to come and talk if you're going to do this. If you have to do it and you're going to try to make it lawful, you know, make it useful, make it work. But at the same time, I would like to see them drop it altogether and let parents be parents, you know. While there are bad parents out there or just reluctant parents about the whole plan, I think we really need to create some incentive for the parents to act on this themselves rather than allowing the school to do the dirty work. The school has taken a step toward Michael's suggestion. [Mary Ann Ricketts, Counselor District 66] One aspect of our program, too, if there is a positive test result, we will pay for one time counseling and evaluation, assessment. We really felt when we set the program up that we didn't just want to call a parent and say there was a positive test and leave them hanging. We wanted to say these are options, these are things that can be done, you know, whether it's some resource in the community or at the referral back to school for us to help that child. Some argue these sorts of drug policies help the kids too much, that there's no accountability. At Norfolk kids are suspended from activities if they submit to testing and are found positive. On the first offense, students face less harsh consequences if they own up to what they've done. At Westside a similar tact is taken. Since no criminal charges are pursued in either case, some say the punishment is too lenient if nonexistent. Administrators say, so what. [Nelson] If we were to turn all our students in if they tested positive, we wouldn't have anyone taking the test. But our main concern is this. We feel that there's are a lot of parents out there that don't realize their son or daughter is using drugs and alcohol and by -- if indeed a positive test comes up, at least the parent is aware now that their son or daughter has a problem with the use of drugs and alcohol. It's up to them then to take the steps necessary to address that issue. Again, what we're trying to do is put the responsibility back on the parents. That's why we have the parents sign the consent form. They're the ones making the decision for their child. Those parents who will sign anyway. At Norfolk about 7% have signed, a low number. At Westside about 20% have signed. As for the State, there is no statewide policy directing schools on punishment for drug use. There's only one guideline schools can use. It's illegal. Reporting for Statewide, I'm Donna Wilson..