Phobias are more than simple fears. They develop when a person begins to organise their life around avoiding the things they are afraid of.
If you have a phobia, you will have an overwhelming need to avoid all contact with the source of your anxiety. Coming into contact, or even the thought of coming into contact, with the cause of your phobia will make you anxious and may cause you to panic.
If the cause of your phobia is an object or animal, such as snakes, and you do not come into contact with it regularly, it is unlikely to affect your day-to-day life. However, if you have a more complex phobia, such as agoraphobia (the fear of open spaces and public places), you may find it very difficult to lead a normal life.
Types of phobia
There are many different phobias, which can be divided into two main categories:
simple phobias, and
complex phobias.
Simple phobias
Simple phobias are fears about specific objects, animals, situations or activities. Some common examples include:
enclosed spaces,
dentists, and
Phobias affect different people in different ways. Some people only react with mild anxiety when confronted with the object of their fear, while others experience severe anxiety or have a severe panic attack .
Complex phobias
Complex phobias tend to be more disabling than simple phobias because they are often associated with a deep-rooted fear or anxiety about a particular circumstance or situation. Two common examples of complex phobias are:
agoraphobia, and
social phobia.
Agoraphobia is a fear of open spaces or public places and can involve anxieties about leaving the home, going into shops or travelling on public transport. It can also involve a fear of being unable to escape immediately to a place of safety, usually the home.
Social phobia is a fear of social situations, such as weddings, or performing in social situations, such as public speaking. People with a social phobia have a fear of embarrassing themselves or of being humiliated in public.
How common are phobias?
Phobias are the most common type of anxiety disorder. In the UK, an estimated 10 million people have phobias. Phobias can affect anyone, regardless of age, sex and social background.
Simple phobias, such as a fear of going to the dentist, usually start during early childhood, often between the ages of four and eight. Simple phobias often disappear on their own as the child gets older and usually do not cause problems in adulthood.
Complex phobias usually start later in life. Social phobias often begin during puberty and agoraphobia in the late teens to early twenties. Sometimes, complex phobias continue for many years.
Almost all phobias can be successfully treated and cured. Treating simple phobias involves gradually becoming exposed to the animal, object, place or situation that causes fear. This process is known as desensitisation or self-exposure therapy (see Treatment and Self-help, above).
Add your rating
Comments are personal views. Any information they give has not been checked and may not be accurate.
User631550 said on 08 January 2012
I feel so sad reading the above. As a hypnotherapist I regularly treat people who suffer from phobias and often one session is enough to eliminate the phobia completely. This is 'simple' phobias. Social phobias do take longer but still respond well.
So if you suffer from a phobia do find a well qualified hypnotherapist near you. As Paul McKenna says 'No one should have to suffer with a phobia.'
User611082 said on 30 October 2011
It saddens me to hear of people who have lived with phobias for many years. That used to be me. I had a fear of both heights, and deep water, both for over 25 years.
Once they were cured it changed my life and career choices dramatically. It also increased my confidence in other areas of my life, and I seem like a different person looking back on it now.
It irritates me though when I see people making categoric assertions that there is only one way to do things. In my case the cure took about 15 minutes and has thus far proved permanent (around 8-9 years ago).
Many therapies work, and probably for different reasons, and I certainly don't assert that what worked for me will do so for everyone. I was so impressed however, that I have started helping others.
I suggest you consider seeking out NLP practitioners who understand the Fast Phobia Cure technique, or Time Line Therapy, or some of the percussive techniques, as one of these may work for you as well. Simple phobias appear to have a common trigger, generally in childhood, and all we have to do is to relearn the experience in a way that is helpful to our brain, and not harmful to us. It sounds simple, and for many people it is exactly that.
I'm in danger of getting a comment removed - but I think it should be available on the NHS!
EmmaHope88 said on 27 June 2011
I've had a phobia of injections since the age of 4 and desperately need help. I've tried talking to my GP but I was brushed off with the comment "You'll grow out of it." I am now 23 and the phobia is worse than ever and I am desperate to be rid of it but I cannot afford to pay for treatment. Does anyone know what I can do? I'm behind on immunisations, have possible Lupus but cannot do the blood tests and live in constant fear of somehow having to have an injection. Please help!
PChris said on 06 December 2010
I have a phobia of slipping - on anything that is or looks slippery so at the moment I am really finding the ice and snow difficult. Has anyone got any suggestions please? I can't seem to find any help in the Chichester area and do not want to undergo hypnotherapy.
petsan said on 25 April 2010
I have suffered from a vomiting phobia since I was about 8 I am now 65 I have had one child and I have 2 grandsons whom I have looked after but was on edge all the time in case they were ill. This phobia has ruined my life and the awful part is that I have let it I did try treatment but it didn't do any good. Along with this phobia I have also suffered from being frightened of going to the toilet I have taken Lomotil for over 25 years I have to take them before I leave home because I cannot even think about using public toilets. My husband and I go away in our caravan and I take Lomotil all the time I am away I know it's not foing me any good but I cannot tell the doctor in case he takes the tabs off me. Anyone out there with any advice? Petsan
Joshua_David said on 13 May 2009
Phobias are usually brought about by painful experiences in the past that have traumatized you so much that after you experienced it, you would try as hard as you can to avoid such situations. But when you do get to encounter these that remind you of your phobia, you would surely panic where you experienced heightened sensations like upset stomach and tremors.
The only way way for you to be able to truly overcome your phobias is to change your self-image. Assess how you reacted to your past experiences and your beliefs that other people inculcated in you. If you reacted to them negatively, it's highly likely that you don't feel well enough about yourself and this prevents you to do what you really wanted to do.
If you are able to create an adequate, realistic self-image to replace that distorted one, then, you would be able to overcome depression. At the same time, you need to use your creative imagination to examine how you are going to live in the present and anticipate the future. Set up realistic goals for yourself through the power of your imagination. Always remember your past successes and how you felt during those times, especially when you are feeling down, so that you would have the courage, confidence, strength and determination to achieve whatever you want to achieve. Also, never dwell on your mistakes. Rather, learn from them and move on knowing that you are wiser and ready to go about your life in a better way, doing everything that you can in order to succeed.