Warrington and Cheshire's Hypnotist and NLP Practitioner Providing you with the best hypnotist, NLP Practitioner in Warrington and Cheshire
Your Shopping Cart
Fear Phobias
Fear Phobias and Hypnosis
fear phobias and hypnosis can help your fear and phobia or help with fear of phobias, get rid of fears and phobias for good with hypnosis
Fears and Phobias Sessions & Courses
Agoraphobia Claustrophobia Disposophobia Fast Phobia Technique (NLP type) Fearless Flying Fear of Air Turbulence Fear of Anaesthesia Fear of Authority Fear of Balloons Fear of Bees or Wasps Fear of Being Alone Fear of Birds Fear of Blood Fear of Blood 2 Fear of Bodily Functions Fear of Bodily Hair Fear of Buttons Fear of Cats Fear of Choking (for Children) Fear of Commitment (Parts Therapy) Fear of Commitment 2 Fear of Conflict Fear of Contracting HIV Fear of Criticism Fear of Crowds Fear of the Dark Fear of the Dark for Children Fear of Death Fear of Dental Treatment Fear of Doctor's &amp; Dentists (White Coat Syndrome) Fear of Dogs Fear of Driving Fear of Dwarfs Fear of Eating in Public Fear of Escalators Fear of Failure Fear of Fainting Fear of Falling over whilst Walking (Balance) Fear of Fear Fear of Flying Fear of Flying (Everyday) Fear of Flying (3) Fear of Furry Animals Fear of Germs Fear of Going Places Fear of Going Out Fear of Heights (or Bridges) Fear of Hospitals Fear of Injections Fear of Insects Fear of Inserting Contact Lenses Fear of Inserting Eye Drops Fear of Internal Examinations Fear of Intimacy Fear of Lifts/Elevators Fear of Lizards Fear of Long Flights Fear of Loud Noises Fear of Monsters Fear of Moths Fear of Motorway (Freeway) Driving Fear of MRI Scan Fear of Needles Fear of New Food Fear of Old Age Fear of Panic Attacks Fear of Passenger Travel Fear of Pregnancy Fear of Public Toilets Fear of Rats and Mice Fear of Rejection Fear of Shopping Centres/Malls Fear of Sleep whilst Driving Fear of Snakes Fear of Spiders Fear of Spiders (for children) Fear of Spiders Webs Fear of Staying Awake all Night Fear of Success Fear of Talking on the Telephone Fear of Technology Fear of Thunderstorms Fear of Travel Fear of the Underground/Subway/Metro Fear of Viruses Fear of Vomiting Fear of Water Fear of Water 2 Fear of Wind Homophobia Letting go of Fears and Phobias Phobias - Helping Your Clients to Overcome Phobia Release Social Phobia
What is a fear?
If someone breaks into a cold sweat, trembles, screams or has any other distressing symptoms at the sight of a mouse, for example, he or she is probably suffering from a fear phobia.
Hypnosis combined with NLP techniques can be most effective in releasing these unhelpful, negative states. Many fears and phobias can be resolved in just one session.
Why do people develop fear phobias?
Clients often say that nothing has happened to cause their phobia. It is simply something they've either always been afraid of or that just occurred for no reason. The phobia may have arisen because of exposure to an event in the past. The response to the event becomes an embedded trigger, and the unconscious mind represses the initial event. Sometimes the phobia has been picked up passed on or learnt from a parent or other authority figure earlier in life. People don't become afraid without reason. The originating event might not have been particularly traumatic at the time but is likely to have caused an emotional conflict, or been anchored by a negative response. Phobias can also occur spontaneously following losing someone close or during periods of extreme stress.
Utilizing hypnosis it is possible to overcome a phobia or fear quickly and easily. For many people phobia hypnosis may be the only effective treatment. While phobia hypnotherapy is extremely effective, it does require 2-4 sessions to identify the initial sensitizing event and to help the client overcome it.
Phobias tend to result from three main life events or experiences. They include trauma, parental impact on childhood, or observing something terrifying. These factors can cover a very wide range of experiences. The hardest phobias to overcome are those hidden beneath layers of subconscious memories. The trigger for the phobia might be difficult to determine using conventional therapy, but it is a relatively simple area to pinpoint when utilizing anxiety hypnotherapy.
Various triggers can set off your fear, but your reaction in some instances can be delayed so that you react to something else entirely. Often times, clients are surprised to discover what the actual sensitizing event is, because at face value it does not seem to have a direct connection to the fear. There is always a connection but it may not be apparent initially.
This is where hypnosis comes in handy as a treatment for phobias. Hypnosis can take you past the critical thinking part of your mind into the subconscious. Every memory you ever had is stored in this part of your mind.
Some of the memories might be dream memories or suppressed memories. People are quick to point out that a phobia does not make sense or that it is illogical. However, it does make sense at the subconscious level. The subconscious mind is actually trying to protect its host. When hypnosis taps into your subconscious mind; the sensitizing event can be identified and reframed.
Hypnosis can manipulate memories so that the trauma attached to them is moved into the light of day. This allows the client to come to terms with it. Utilizing hypnosis, clients can learn to overcome fears and phobias. About 3.7 percent of the population is clinically diagnosed with a phobia. The root cause of the fear likely stems from a childhood experience. This experience must be reframed so that the subconscious mind understands that the flight response is no longer necessary.
Unfortunately some fears can negatively impact your life. For some people the phobias are paralyzing. For others they manifest themselves in anxiety. Left untreated the anxiety can blossom into a full-blown phobia. Anxiety hypnosis is a powerful tool for introducing positive and life changing suggestions into the subconscious.
Anxiety hypnotherapy can offer immediate relief from the debilitating terrors that control your life. Your anxiety and phobias can be overcome relatively quickly. In fact, hypnosis has been known to help clients overcome fears in as little as one session. Bear in mind however, that the average number of anxiety hypnosis sessions required to overcome a fear is probably closer to three sessions.
If someone you know suffers from a phobia, it may be beneficial for them to consider phobia hypnotherapy as a solution. It is always a good idea to seek out a certified hypnotist who specializes in helping people overcome debilitating fears.