Social Phobia, Social Anxiety
Written by HealthyPlace.com Staff Writer
Page 1 of 3
online conference transcript
Dr. Luann Linquist , discusses what you can do about a persistent irrational fear of social situations. When it comes to social phobia, social anxiety (some refer to it as extreme shyness), the outcome is generally good with treatment.
David: Good Evening. I'm David Roberts. I'm the moderator for tonight's conference. I want to welcome everyone to HealthyPlace.com . Our guest is psychologist Luann Linquist and our topic tonight is "Social Phobia, Social Anxiety".
People who experience "Social Phobia, Social Anxiety" become very anxious when facing certain social situations. They desperately fear becoming humiliated in social situations, specifically of embarrassing themselves in front of other people. In case some of you were wondering if you're the only ones suffering from this debilitating disorder, about 8% suffer from some form of social anxiety at any given time.
Our guest, Dr. Luann Linquist, has been in practice for over 20 years and works with Anxiety and Phobia patients. She uses various "brief therapy" techniques, including one called the "Delete Technique," which we'll talk about later. You can read more about Dr. Linquist by visiting her site at: http://www.delete.com .
Good evening Dr. Linquist and welcome to HealthyPlace.com . What is it that causes someone to have a fear of social situations; to be a social phobic?
Dr. Linquist: There are several causes. There is usually a family of origin connection or a major incident of abuse embarrassment. Usual onset is mid-teens to early childhood.
David: I read somewhere that people who suffer from social anxiety usually have another disorder along with that. In many cases, either depression or an addiction, like alcoholism. Is that your experience with your clients?
Dr. Linquist: No, that is not my experience with my clients. Anxiety and panic are usually very prominent.
David: Individuals who suffer from social anxiety, are they afraid of only certain situations or is it most social situations that cause severe anxiety?
Dr. Linquist: There is a range of suffering, from one type of situation like public speaking to a generalized suffering under any social situation. For instance, many men and women suffer from inability to use the public bathrooms.
David: What types of treatment for social phobia are available and which are most effective?
Dr. Linquist: The traditional treatment is desensitization, a newer one is EMDR (Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing), and my specialty is DELETE Techniques.
David: Can you briefly describe each, their purpose and how they work?
Dr. Linquist: Sure. The first one, desensitization, exposes people to the situation that is producing the anxiety and panic. This is usually a graduated process over a period of time.
The second is Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) , which I'm certified to do. It is based on the healing response from REM sleep.
The third is a process that is teaching people how to use their own 'delete' button to get rid of unwanted thoughts, feelings, and beliefs, quickly.
Many people have found relief and freedom from all three of the methods. DELETE is my favorite and gives the best results quickly.
David: Before we start taking audience questions, I want to mention a site note:
Here's the link to the HealthyPlace.com Anxiety-Panic Community . You can click on this link and sign up for the anxiety mail list at the top of the page so you can keep up with events like this.
And now, here are some audience questions Dr. Linquist:
bigmac: I have been suffering from social anxiety for over 10 years and have tried practically all antidepressants. However, none of them seem to do any good. Any suggestions?
Dr. Linquist: Medications, without addressing your thoughts, feelings and beliefs is obviously not doing the job. Find a good therapist.
I help people every day who are caught up in the 'swirl' of their thoughts. There is an ongoing battle and habit of going over-and-over the same limited thinking. It's like a knot with no beginning and no ending. What is needed is a way to break through that thinking and get rid of it...NOW!
Tray: I have just recently read a book by a physician and he believes anxiety and panic are actually diseases of the brain we are born with. Do you have an opinion on this?
Dr. Linquist: There is research to indicate this is true. In addition, researchers have also found that some causes of anxiety and panic are situational in nature--the result of being exposed to possibly a traumatic incident.