* Everyone knows that tobacco manufacturers target teens! They have to. They need new customers to replace the ones they have killed.
* This year about 30,000 kids in Canada will become regular smokers. Quitting once you are hooked is not easy. Ask any smoker.
* Over half of Grade 12 students who smoke are unable to quit and more than 70% still smoke eight years later due to nicotine addiction.
* 8 out of 10 teens who try smoking get hooked. 5 years later, 80% are heavy smokers.
* Over 20% of high school girls are daily, regular smokers
* 80% of teen smokers would like to quit. Within months of their first puff, most teen smokers struggle to stop smoking, but most can’t quit.
* 60% of teen smokers try to quit. Most smokers try several times before stopping for good. So if at first you don’t succeed, try again.
* Most smokers start before they finish high school. If you can make it to high school graduation without smoking, chances are you never will start smoking.
* Nicotine is a powerful, mood-altering drug that is extremely toxic. It is as addictive as heroin and cocaine. Tar is a dark, sticky combination of hundreds of chemicals including poisons and cancer causing substances. Chemicals are carried to every part of your body by the blood.
Nicotine is one of the most addictive substances in the world, the reason most of us smoke is because we are hopelessly addicted to it. Sure, we probably started off because of peer pressure or we wanted something to relieve our stress, but after a while we carry on smoking simply because we are addicted – plain and simple.
Beating any addiction is never easy, and the longer you’re addicted for the harder it is to beat. Smoking is probably the hardest addiction you will ever have to overcome. But, it need not be that hard; in fact with the right knowledge and the right product it can actually be quite easy.
Understanding Why Teens Smoke
“Smoking is dangerous to your health.” A very famous anti-smoking ad that is often neglected by smoking teenagers. Such problems may arise, especially when dealing with out of control teenagers. And this is where a parent’s dilemma starts.
As a parent of a smoking teenager, you might have no idea why your teen starts to smoke. And the first question that might cross your mind is how can I ask my teen to quit? Before you can do this, it’s important to understand a few things first.
Why Do Teenagers Start Smoking?
Peer pressure is one of the most common reasons why teenagers smoke. If one of their friends has started, they think they have to smoke also. They do this to maintain acceptance and the sense of belonging to a group.
Another reason for smoking teenagers is image projection. An “image” is attached to cigarettes like being cool, manly or grown up. Adolescence is the time when teens struggle for identity. If teens want to have one of these images, then smoking maybe the answer they’re looking for.
Problems at home may put a lot of pressure on your kids. And they use smoking as a form of relief for the stress. For many out of control teenagers, this is a result of rebellion. Knowing that this will annoy their parents and because it is forbidden, it becomes more alluring to them.
Teens like to act as if they’re dangerous or mature. By smoking, they can act on those feeling. They might just want to try it the first time but as we all know, once you puff, it is hard to stop. This is because nicotine is present, which is highly addictive but ignored by many teens and adults alike. Consequences of a Nicotine Habit
Smoking is a hard habit to break. Along with it, you can acquire harmful effects to your health. If you smoke, you can also end up with bad skin. Substances like nicotine block blood vessels that prevent nutrients from reaching the skin, which in turn causes premature aging.
Adolescents are very much concerned with their appearance and personal hygiene. Reminding them that cigarettes leave smokers with persistent bad breath might turn them away from smoking. And the stale smell of the smoke often lingers in their hair and clothing, which is extremely unappealing to others that don’t take up this nasty habit.
There is also an increased risk of illness. And to top it off, smoking teenagers may experience a greater risk for injury and a slower healing process. As a parent, you might want to discuss these consequences with your son or daughter. Understanding more about this harmful habit may lead you to a more informative conversation with your teen.
Fight back with Butt it Out™
If you are trying to quit smoking and you have never heard of Butt it Out™ before, then you are missing out on the most effective quit smoking medicine on the market. For many of the people who have used Butt it Out™, quitting smoking was an easy thing to do.
Don’t get us wrong, you still require willpower and the desire to quit. But compared to what you have to go through with the cold turkey method, it's a walk in the park. Also, the knowledge we impart to you in our Free E-Book is very valuable in making you a successful quitter! Follow these tips when you receive your copy!
Quitting smoking can be very hard indeed, but with Butt it Out™ you should find that it is manageable and not as stressful as you might think.
If your struggling to quit smoking then try Butt it Out™. If you are between 13 and 18 years of age your choices are very limited. Cold turkey or Butt it Out™!
For Parents
If you find your teen smoking, take it seriously. Stopping teen smoking in its tracks is the best way to promote a lifetime of good health. Start talking.
You could simply tell your teen to stop smoking. It's an important message. But commands, threats and ultimatums aren't likely to work. Instead of getting angry, be curious and supportive. Ask your teen what made him or her start smoking. Perhaps your teen is trying to fit in at school, or maybe your teen thinks that smoking will help relieve stress or pressure. Sometimes teen smoking is an attempt to feel cool or more grown-up.
Once you understand why your teen is smoking, you'll be better equipped to address smoking as a potential problem — as well as help your teen eventually stop smoking.
Encourage your teen to share his or her concerns.
Although the consequences of smoking — such as cancer, heart attack and stroke — are real, they're probably beyond the realm of your teen's concern. Rather than lecturing your teen on the long-term dangers of smoking, you might ask your teen what he or she considers the negative aspects of smoking. Once your teen has had his or her say, offer your own list of negatives. Consider appealing to your teen's vanity:
* Smoking gives you bad breath. * Smoking makes your clothes and hair smell. * Smoking turns your teeth and fingernails yellow. * Smoking makes you look pale and unhealthy. * Smoking causes wrinkles. * Smoking leaves you with a hacking cough and phlegm. * Smoking zaps your energy for sports and other favorite activities.
Of course, smoking is also expensive. Prompt your teen to calculate the weekly, monthly or yearly cost of smoking. You might compare the cost of smoking with electronic gadgets, clothes or other items your teen considers important.
One final note - statistics say that a high percentage of teens actually want to quit smoking! Ask your child if they would quit if they had a government approved medicine to help them quit. If so, then you need our medicine to help them. And don't forget - it is Guaranteed to Help Your Teen Quit or Your Money Back!
How to Deal with A Teen Who is Smoking
A minor who smokes is not likely to walk right up to their parents with a cigarette firmly between their lips. Just because a parent doesn't see their teen smoking doesn't mean that they don't have a smoking habit. Parents need to talk to their child about smoking and watch for signs that they are smoking. Smoking can be a strong temptation for some teens, especially teens that have friends or family that smoke, and even though cigarettes aren't supposed to be sold to minors, teens are still able to get them.
The First Reaction
You have just found an empty packet of cigarettes in 15-year old Anna's bathroom cupboard! Shocked, you are ready to confront her and demand explanations. But before you do...
* Respond, do not react. A reaction is immediate, but a response is well thought and planned. * Analyze what concerns you most. The fact that your daughter smokes, that she has kept it from you, or the reason she has picked up the habit? When a Parent Judges, the Child Justifies and this does not bring you closer to getting her to quit. You might have greater success if you adopt the Adult role and Reason with her. * Do not trick or corner her into coming out with the truth. Plan the words you will use, practice an even tone and then tell her that you found the cigarettes in the bathroom. Ask whether they belong to her. If you are calm and expect her to be truthful, chances are she will be. Even if she is rude or lies about the cigarettes, work through the issue. The goal is to get to the root of the problem and encourage her to quit.
Why does Anna smoke?
Is she being pressured at school? Is she not doing well at school? Does she suffer from low self-esteem? Are there problems at home? Are you nagging your child over trivial matters instead of getting to the root of the problem.
If your answer to most or all of these is 'No', then a possible reason Anna smokes is that she wants to appear 'cool' to her friends. This requires a different approach.
If the answer to any of these is 'yes,' then you have at least found your direction. You will have to uncover her fears and problems layer by layer, until she is comfortable with herself and does not need cigarettes as a crutch. This is easier said than done. It takes time. There will be setbacks. Anna may not want to talk or she may not tell you the truth each time you do talk. Avoid confrontations (I know you smoke - how dare you?), threats (There will be no more allowance until this stops!), pleas (don't you think you could give up just for my sake?) and moralizing (is this how you behave after all we've taught you?). Remember, a teen is a child trying to learn how to act like an adult, so treat her like an adult. Reason and talk with her like you would a friend. Treat the issue as something that concerns both of you deeply, not as 'her problem.' You are not adversaries, you are in it together. Together, the two of you might just win the battle.
Tackling the Situation
Teen smoking is a huge problem with teens, especially girls, who are lighting up younger and younger. The mix of tobacco and parental and social disapproval is too much to resist. Telling them to quit and showing them the dangers probably won't do much good, because it will only make it seem more exciting. Preaching to them would probably just make them continue to hide it from you. The trick is to address the problem in a way that will help them stop smoking immediately, especially if they are in their early teens.
Most commonly, teens smoke because it is a 'cool' thing to do. However, a large number of young people are now aware of the dangers of smoking and try to quit for several reasons including their health. Asking anyone to quit smoking won't work until they want to quit. As parents, we have our work cut out for us finding out what will motivate our teens to quit smoking.
Clearly, there is no single path to overcome the problem and find a solution. How you handle the situation will depend on your relationship with your teen, what strategy you employ, and what works best for your teen. But whatever you do, assure her of your unconditional love and support. They may not admit or even realize it, but all children need that structure and support at home. They depend on it.
A Note About Addiction
One of the reasons smoking is so psychologically addictive is because the method of delivery - smoke - has an immediate effect on your system. In other words, you are 'rewarded' right after the behavior - not 5 minutes later, or half an hour later. Psychological research shows that rewards or punishments that follow the action quickly have a much greater effect than rewards or punishments that are delayed. So the act of lighting up is immediately rewarded, and it becomes a very strong behavior, making it very difficult to quit.
Because our medicine mimics nicotine, but in a steady, all-the-time way, NOT as a response to lighting a cigarette, and also partially blocks the effects of real nicotine, the act of lighting up isn't as 'rewarding' as before, and the addiction itself is weakened. Both of these effects make it easier to quit smoking.
Do keep in mind that the 'reward' of nicotine in the brain is only one part of the physical and psychological addiction to nicotine and smoking in general. There are many other aspects of smoking dependence that should be addressed by psychological and behavioral techniques designed to help eliminate their effects. See below, also our free E-Book has lots of good tips in this regard!
How To Help Yourself Quit Smoking
Educate Yourself
Most people know that smoking cigarettes greatly increases the risk of developing lung cancer. But there are other health risks. These include:
* Other types of cancer, such as cancer of the mouth, esophagus, and bladder. * Smoking can also cause leukemia. * Smokers are more likely to die from heart attacks and strokes than non-smokers. * Women over the age of 35 who use oral contraceptives are more likely to have blood clots in their legs that can travel to the heart and lungs. * Pregnant women who smoke are more likely to miscarry and to have lower birth-weight babies. * Smoking can also hurt those who live in your household. Children can develop wheezing and worsened asthma attacks, and tend to have an increased likelihood of developing middle ear infections. Teenagers are much more likely to begin smoking in a house where even one parent smokes.
Motivate Yourself
Make a list of the bad things that happen when you smoke. Then make a list of what you like about smoking. You may use the above to help get you started. Compare these two lists, and decide for yourself why quitting smoking would benefit you and those around you.
Prepare Yourself
Construct an action plan, which should include:
* Set a date for quitting, avoiding time periods which are likely to be very stressful. Mark it on a calendar, and tell family and friends. * Notice situations and emotions which cause you to reach for a cigarette. These are your smoking triggers. Some triggers might be: * Stressful situations: Often the first response to stress is to reach for a cigarette in order to calm down. Instead, it is often effective to learn relaxation through deep breathing exercises. Once you learn these techniques, taking a few minutes to put them into practice tends to help reduce stress. You can see a therapist to help you learn these techniques. A basic exercise is included at the end of this post. * Negative emotions: Feeling upset, embarrassed, or angry can be one of the biggest triggers for smoking. Relaxation exercises help here as well. * Daily routine: Most people have a routine to their day, including when they smoke. Some people smoke with a morning cup of coffee, some in the car, some during breaks at work. During these times, your body is primed to crave nicotine. Be attuned to this, and have a plan to help with this craving. Some people find it useful to replace the hand-to-mouth feeling with something similar: eat carrots or chew sugarless gum, for example. Any of these sorts of tricks may help fool your body into feeling the comfort that smoking offers.
Gather Support
Tell your family and friends your quit date, and get in the frame of mind to accept their support and help. For example, have them help you distract yourself from smoking. Work colleagues can often be helpful as well. Why not find someone who can be a "quit buddy" and the two of you can quit together?
Implement Your Action Plan
On the day you quit:
* Throw away all of your cigarettes, lighters and ashtrays. * Stay busy, preferably with activities that keep your hands busy. * Exercise, eat well and drink lots of fluids. * Use your support system. * Carry things to put in your mouth instead of cigarettes, such as hard candy, gum or raw cut vegetables. * Practice your deep breathing exercises.
Evaluate and Fine-Tune Your Plan
Review your efforts and evaluate what in your action plan worked and what did not. Keep doing what has been successful, but don't focus on interventions that have not been helpful. Instead, think about different ways to achieve your goal.
Don't Be Hard on Yourself
Everyone has a hard time at first, and everyone slips up from time to time. Don't dwell on this - instead, focus on your successes, Even if you have made only one change, or if you managed to have only one cigarette fewer than usual during the course of the day, you are well on the way to improving your health! Feel good about your efforts, and notice how empowered you feel.
Reward Yourself
Do something daily or every few days that is just for you, such as going out to a concert or a movie, or taking the time to enjoy a long hot bath or shower. Try saving the money you would have spent for cigarettes in a jar, then buying something on your wish list.
Help Yourself Stay on Track
Don't become discouraged if you quit and then smoke again. Just pick yourself up, dust yourself off and set a new quit date. Don't be afraid to try over and over - your persistence will eventually pay off. Remember that you CAN succeed at this challenge to better your health and that of others around you.
Breathing Techniques to Help You Relax
* Take a normal breath in and out through your nose, breathing calmly and evenly. * As you exhale, think of a relaxing word such as "calm" or "peace." * Count to four, then begin your next breath. * Do as many repetitions as it takes for you to feel yourself relaxing.