Children and young people, including students and those in training, are entitled to reductions for many leisure activities on presentation of the relevant student ID card ( ein Schülerausweis or ein Studentenausweis ). This card is only issued by the schooling system or university and student cards from abroad (apart from ISIC) are normally not accepted (especially for travel on public transport).
For detailed information on how to qualify for a Schülerausweis : Click here (in German)
The Bahncard is a rail card which provides concessions for students and adults for reduced (and in some cases, free) travel
The Studentenbahncard is available to teenagers with relevant student identification
It is always worth asking if there are concessions for young people if it is not immediately obvious.
Many regions and local authority districts have family passes ( Familienpässe ) or holiday passes ( Ferienpässe ) with a variety of special offers and reductions to local amenities, public transport and/or places of interest in the region. Passes are sold at bookshops and libraries in the region. Sometimes, to promote these facilities, local press offer a limited number of passes free to first comers.
The Youth Employment Protection Act ( Jugendarbeitsschutzgesetz ) and the Child Labour Protection Ordinance ( Kinderarbeitsschutzverordnung ) protect young people under the age of 18 from work which is too difficult, dangerous or unsuitable for them and also limits youth working hours.
For the full text of the Jugendarbeitsschutzgesetz : Click here (PDF in German)
For the full text of the Kinderarbeitsschutzverordnung : Click here (PDF in German)
For information in English on laws relating to young people: Click here
Up to the age of 13 , young people are not allowed to do any paid part-time work outside the household.
At age 13 young people are allowed to have a part-time job under the following conditions:
Parents must agree
The work must not be damaging to their health or school performance
Young people are not allowed to work for more than two hours a day. This also applies in the school holidays
They must not work after 18:00. This also applies in the school holidays
The work must be morally sound and young people must not come into contact with alcohol or tobacco
Possible jobs for 13 year olds include: babysitting, delivering newspapers, private tuition, helping out with sport, and looking after animals.
Between the age of 15 and 18 young people are allowed to work under a number of conditions, depending on whether they are still in compulsory education.
If the young person is still in compulsory education (that is, up to and including Year 10):
The same restrictions apply as for 13 and 14 year olds
The exception is that young people aged 15 to 18 are allowed to work for four weeks in the school holidays
If the young person is no longer in compulsory schooling (that is, they are in Year 11 or above):
Young people may work up to 8 hours a day or 40 hours per week
They are allowed to work between 06:00 and 20:00, except for jobs in the restaurant industry where they are allowed to work until 22:00 and in companies where there is shift work until 23:00
The only work they are allowed to do on Saturdays is in shops and in sport organisations
The only work they are allowed to do on Sundays is in hospitals and in the food and drink industry
No work is allowed in areas that could be harmful to health or which are morally unsuitable
There are also exceptions for children performing in theatrical and musical shows, film, television and radio productions as well as auditioning for them. The person employing the child is required to apply to the respective authorities who regulate the hours the child is permitted to work.
Foreign teenagers (not German nationals) should go to the Employment Agency ( Agentur für Arbeit ) to find out if a work permit ( ein Arbeitserlaubnis ) is required. A work permit is not required for young people:
from countries that belong to the EU
who have a permanent residence permit
There are other exceptions but these need to be checked with the Employment Agency ( Agentur für Arbeit ).
Schuelerjobs (in German) is a free site listing jobs for young people still at school and/or students according to region
The Employment Agency's Berfufnet provides information about qualifications, training and any other important information needed for specific careers (in German)
A Mofa is a small moped or motor-assisted bicycle that can be driven without a driving licence. It is, however, necessary to pass a written and practical test, available at the majority of driving schools ( Fahrschule ).
A Mofa must not be ridden by anyone under the age of 15 years
Helmets do not need to be worn
Mofas must not be driven over 25 Km/hour
A Mofa must comply with the following:
The engine must be less than 30ccs
It must use less than 0.5 Kw of power
It must weigh no more than 30 Kg when empty
The front wheel must be no more than 26cm wide
The back wheel must be no more than 28cm wide
The Mokick (from the words Mo tor and Kick starter) is slightly bigger than a Mofa and is licensed to carry two people. It is 50cc and can be driven up to a speed of 45 Km/hour.
A driving licence is required to drive a Mokick and this can only be applied for if the person is 16 years old or older.
Driving licence
In all regions of Germany 17-year-olds may get a driving licence but may not drive alone until they reach 18 years old.
From the age of 16 and a half, teenagers may apply to a driving school for a driving licence with parental permission. If the application is approved, the young person can start having lessons with a driving school. These cover both theory and practical sides of the exam. The written and practical tests may only be taken one month before the 17th birthday. When both parts of the test have been passed and the driver reaches 17 years, they are eligible to obtain a full driving licence.
At 17 years, drivers must be accompanied while driving by a person who is at least 30 years, who has at least five years' driving experience, and their name must be on the test certificate. There is no limit to the number of 30+ year olds who can be named on the test certificate.
Note: Up until the age of 18 no one is allowed to drive without an older named person in the car.
The possession, dealing, production and import of cannabis, ecstasy, cocaine and heroin are illegal in Germany. The most regularly used drugs are alcohol and cannabis. There is some use of amphetamines and ecstasy in night clubs.
The EU Alice Project provides information and advice on all types of drugs currently in circulation in Germany and gives a solid reference for parents and children
Support is available for drug addicts. Drug counselling is free of charge. Schools and colleges also carry out ongoing drug prevention programmes.
For a list of drug counselling centres ( Suchtberatungsstellen ): Click here (in German)
Germany has quite low rates of teenage pregnancy compared to other countries such as the USA. The age of consent is 14. Contraception is readily available from a gynaecologist ( Frauenarzt ) or through the Family Planning Organisation and contraceptives are also on sale from chemists and vending machines. Advice, help and counselling about sex, relationships and contraception are available anonymously and free of charge.
From the age of 14 a girl may visit a gynaecologist and have the pill prescribed without parental permission. If the girl is under 14 years, parents must be informed and included in the decision to prescribe any form of contraception.
Should a minor (girl under 18 years) become pregnant, the doctor will decide if she is mature enough to choose to have an abortion or if the parents need to be informed to make the decision for her. Responsibility for the child is carried by the parents until the birth mother reaches 18 years of age. Girls under 18 years have no legal right of care for their children in Germany.
A boy aged between 15 and 18 who gets a girl pregnant must decide if he wants to be acknowledged as the father of the baby. If the boy decides to take on this responsibility, he must sign a legal declaration in the presence of a public notary.
Since December 2006 smoking is not allowed in public buildings, schools and hospitals. Smoking is allowed in pubs, bars, discos and beer tents, but pressure is mounting on the government to bring Germany in line with other EU Member States and ban smoking in public places altogether.
It is illegal to buy tobacco and cigarettes under the age of 16.
Smoking is illegal under the age of 16 in public.
For more information regarding the smoking ban and restrictions in individual states in Germany: Click here (in German)
It is important to note that the dates vary from region to region and from year to year.
State Schools do not provide many activities for teenagers in Germany but there are private clubs for sports including golf, football, tennis and handball. Some summer camps with language schools involve a one or two week camping and language learning break; there are also activity holidays abroad and exchange programs with foreign teenagers from other schools.
Some private schools do arrange specific holidays, such as ski trips or European culture trips. These are planned well in advance, require parental acceptance, insurance cover and the appropriate fees.
Schools normally have details of such activities and local sport and culture clubs pinned on notice boards. Otherwise, check the local city website or yellow pages for more details.
If you believe any of the information on this page is incorrect or out-of-date, please let us know. AngloINFO makes every effort to ensure its INFOrmation Pages are as comprehensive, accurate and up-to-date as possible, but we're also grateful for any help!
(If you want to contact AngloINFO for any other reason, please follow the instructions on this website's contact page .)