Healthy Living
Navigation: In the Healthy Living Blog you are here: Home · Quit Smoking and Greatly Improve Your Health
Quit Smoking and Greatly Improve Your Health
If you smoke then the best thing that you can do to improve your health is to quit.
The article Cigarette Smoking Tragedy lists some of the many diseases that are a result of smoking. You can treat many of these conditions with herbal and other remedies, but any approach needs to start with removing the underlying cause of the problem - cigarette smoking.
In future articles on this blog I will be writing about the prevention and treatment of various health problems such as arthritis, heart disease, osteoporosis, fatigue and so forth. All of my recommendations for treating (and preventing) these conditions will include 'do not smoke'. Cigarette smoke causes problems for all tissues of the body and for these tissues to repair and heal the underlying irritant needs to be removed.
I have given lectures along these lines to many students over the years and almost always in the group will be someone (who is young and smokes) who has a grandfather or other relative who they maintain has smoked "all his life" and he is 85 or 76 or whatever age. The inference is that the "smoking didn't hurt him" and he is old - so it may not happen to them. However, when we really look at the relative's health we find that it is not that great - true he is still alive but that is quite different from actually being healthy and living well.
Many people think that 'old people' will have diseases such as heart disease, arthritis, coughs, poor circulation and that these are a natural part of aging - this is not the case. These conditions are the natural consequence of a particular lifestyle (of which smoking is one part) but they do not have to be a part of healthy aging.
When we look at aging, as we currently see it, what we are looking at is pathology brought about by lifestyle choices - currently we do not know what real - healthy aging looks like.
We do not know what the relatives of the students mentioned above would be like if they hadn't smoked 'all their lives'. What more would they be able to do and enjoy!
The problems associated with cigarette smoking are not isolated to the elderly. It is important to realize that some people have serious problems caused by smoke when they are still in their twenties. In my next article 'Cigarette Smoking: How will it Affect You' presents two people that I have worked with who were young and suffering because of their smoking.
The best thing that you can do for your health if you smoke is to quit. Growerz can support you as you become smoke free. Take a tour and see how they will help you.
Our Books
The foundation of your health must consist of eliminating toxins, following a healthy lifestyle and eating well, as explained in Volume 1 of Safe Colon Cleansing Your Good Health Guide .
Remember that good, healthy food can also look, smell and taste great! And it need not be expensive. See Dr Jenny Tylee's tips and hundreds of recipes in Volume 2 of Safe Colon Cleansing Your Good Health Guide .