Teenage Smoking
Encouraging Children Not To Start Smoking
Children who talk to their fathers about the issues that are important to them are less likely to take-up smoking during early adolescence, a 2010 University study found.
Dr James White from the Cardiff Univerrsity   School of Medicine undertook a three-year-study, involving some 3,500 11 to 15 year-olds, as part of the British Youth Panel Survey - a self report survey of children in the British Household Panel survey.
Results indicated that one of the strongest protective factors for reducing the risk of experimenting with smoking in early adolescence was how often fathers talked with their children, both boys and girls, about 'things that mattered'.
The frequency of family arguments and family meals did not have a significant effect.
Dr White, who presents his findings to the British Psychological Society's Annual Conference in April 2010, said: "This study suggests that a greater awareness of parents' and especially fathers' potential impact upon their teenagers' choices about whether to smoke is needed. Fathers should be encouraged and supported to improve the quality and frequency of communication with their children during adolescence.
"The impact of teenager parenting is relatively un-researched and further research is very much needed."
Only children who had never smoked at the time the study began took part.  As well as their smoking, the children were also asked about the frequency of parental communication, arguments with family members and the frequency of family meals.
After three years, the responses of children who had remained non smokers were compared to those who said they had experimented with smoking at some point.
Recognised risk factors for smoking, such as age, participant sex, household income, parental monitoring and parental smoking, were all taken into account during analysis of the study's findings.
I used your website for the first time yesterday ... I will definitely use you again! The product has been delivered this morning, so not only did I get an excellent product, I also got excellent service. I will recommend you to my friends!