Is Your Child Ready for Kindergarten?   Take a simple 15 minute quiz to compare your child's state of current development with well researched developmental benchmarks to determine if the child is on-track to be ready for Kindergarten.  Here is how the quiz works.  After identifying the child's age, parents/guardians answer questions about their child development in four areas: language, social/emotional, cognitive, and motor skills.  The results tell parents/guardians if their child is on track in that area, or may need more attention.  Links are provided to age-specific information on the Minnesota Department of Education's (MDE) website: MN Parent's Know
Schools vary in their philosophy of learning and in their approach to teaching. There is no "perfect school," and no single method is best for every student. Parent/guardian goals, child needs and school resources need to fit together to provide a good educational experience for your child. Also remember that some schools receive more applications than the spaces they have available. The suggestions here are intended to prompt your own thinking. You may have many questions or thoughts not included here. In the end, the choice is yours.
How does my child's learning style affect my choice of schools?
Individuals learn in different ways. It is important to consider the way your child learns when choosing a school. As your child's first teacher, you know more than anyone about how your child learns. These questions will help you focus your knowledge about your child.
Does your child like to draw or doodle while listening to someone talk?
Does your child like to touch things and take them apart to see how they work?
Does your child like things very orderly and in a predictable routine?
Does your child like to think out loud or does your child like to think things through completely before talking?
Does your child need a quiet place to concentrate?
Does your child like many things going on at once or prefer to do one thing at a time?
Does your child prefer to work with others or work alone?
Does your child always need to know why or does your child accept things without many questions?
Does your child like to try doing new things without asking for help?
Can you give your child a general instruction or does your child prefer very detailed instructions?
Does your child need to be active and moving while thinking?
Does your child prefer a highly competitive or a noncompetitive environment?
Does your child remember things best from seeing, hearing, or doing?
How to select a school for your child
Saint Paul Public Schools offer a variety of options for students and families. The opportunity to choose a school allows families to play a key role in their child's education. Making good decisions about schools requires careful consideration of your goals as a parent/guardian and of your child's needs as a learner.
The questions in this section are designed to help you get the information you need. You may want to keep a record of your answers. Every family can benefit from examining the options available to them.
How do I conduct a school visit?
First, attend the school's open house or showcase. If you like what you see, call the school and make an appointment for a visit. Do not just "drop by" and expect a tour. School staff are very busy attending to the needs of the students and may not have time to show you around unless you make an appointment.
As you walk through the hallways, ask yourself these questions.
Is the building clean, attractive and well-maintained?
Is the atmosphere pleasant and inviting?
Do the sounds coming from the classrooms show respect for students, families and learning?
Use all of your senses to be aware of the environment because your child will be experiencing this every day.
Ask questions about the school's curriculum and services:
What subjects are offered?
How are classes organized?
What services are there for special interests or needs?
What after-school programs are available?
Does the school philosophy fit your family needs?
Does the school nurture and enhance cultural diversity?
Consider whether the activities at the school are consistent with the school's philosophy and goals.
Look at the facilities for special enrichment classes, for example: art, physical education, music, technology, to determine if they meet your child's needs.
Ask questions of teachers, students, administrators, secretaries, and custodians. However, always remember that they have jobs to do and may not have time to talk with you at that moment.
Ask yourself if the school is organized around the many and varied needs of students.
Put yourself in your child's shoes and imagine how you would feel going to this school.
Find out from teachers and administrators what is most important in their school. Is this what is most important to you?
Attend a family event and ask other families what they like best and least about the school. Discuss with other families any challenges they've experienced at the school.
What kind of school do I want for my child?
To get started, answer these questions and write down your answers.
What are important characteristics I want my child's school to have?
List these:
Circle the three things on your list that are most important to you.
What are the most important things for my child to learn? List these:
Circle the three things you want your child to learn that can best be learned at school.
Read the school descriptions in the School Choices and Services Catalog and/on the school district web site at www.spps.org .  Then visit schools which seem to match your child's needs to make sure that the schools you are considering offer the things that you have indicated.
What else should I consider?
Other factors also play an important role in making a good school choice. Ask yourself the following questions:
What applications or entrance tests are required?
How will my child be transported?
How long is the bus ride?
about transportation for after school activities?
How will the distance from school affect our family?
Will the distance affect my involvement (as a parent) in the school?
How will the distance from home affect my child's friendships and participation in church and other community activities?
Does the school have formal and informal means of communicating with families?
What opportunities exist for family involvement in decision making, planning, fund raising, and volunteer activities?
What child care arrangements will be necessary?
What additional questions should I ask if my child has special education needs?
Please note: Not all special education services are available at every school
Physical Setting: Will my child have physical access to all appropriate areas of the building?  Can students with special needs move about the classrooms with ease?  How frequently do students move from one area of the building to another?  How often do they move from one teacher to another?
Health Support: Can the school's health services meet my child's needs?
Opportunity for Inclusion: What is the school's approach for including students with special needs?  Are students with special needs included in extracurricular/enrichment opportunities?  What experience do the classroom teachers have in working with students who have special education needs?
Characteristics of the Student Population: Does the size of the student population at the school support my child's learning style?  Will my other children be able to attend the same school?
Transportation/Distance: Is the proper transportation available?  How will the distance from school affect my family?
For more information regarding special education services available to your child, call the Section 504 Lead Resource at 651-767-8321.
How do I know I'm making the right choice?
Trust your own knowledge of your child.
Trust your own feelings about a school.
Remember that your child must be prepared for a world very different from the one you experienced as a young adult.