Kindergarten readiness: Is your child ready for school?
What is kindergarten readiness? No single factor determines whether a child is ready to start school. Here's how to tell if your child is mature enough physically, socially, and cognitively.
What are cutoff dates and how do I know if my child has met the deadline?
Cutoff dates are deadlines schools use to determine who can enter the next kindergarten class. Your child must reach the age of 5 by the cutoff date, which is usually September 1 or December 1 in most school districts, though some states have cutoffs as early as June or no deadline at all. Many schools still use these dates to determine who is ready for school, but research shows that your child's chronological age isn't the best way to decide whether he has what it takes to be a successful kindergartner. Kindergarten "readiness" is the real issue. In recent years, early childhood educators have begun to focus on a child's physical, social, and cognitive development rather than age.
What is kindergarten readiness?
Experts say no single or simple factor determines whether a child is ready for kindergarten. Instead, a child's development needs to be evaluated on several fronts. His ability to think logically, speak clearly, and interact well with other children and adults are all critically important to success in school. A child's physical development also needs to be considered.
In reality, very few children are equally competent in all these areas. Many children who are advanced mentally may lag behind emotionally, while children who are extremely adept physically may be slower in terms of language development.
But most early childhood educators agree that a child's brain development is the most important gauge of readiness for kindergarten. In other words, your child may be small for his age, and lagging behind other kids socially and physically, but if his language, thinking, and perceptual skills are in place, then he'll probably do well in kindergarten.
How can I tell if my child is ready?
If he's in preschool, talk to the teacher. She probably has a good sense of his development and how he compares with other children who would be at his grade level.
If your child is not in preschool or you just want another opinion, check with your pediatrician. She will know about your child's physical development and can offer helpful feedback as to whether your child is ready.
You can also talk with family members and friends who know your child well. Pay particular attention to the comments of teachers, or those who have experience working with children in schools, whether as a staff person or a volunteer.
Visiting a kindergarten class in the school in which you plan to enroll your child can also give you invaluable information. As you stand in the back of the room, pay attention to how the other children are behaving, how they play with each other, and what kinds of skills they have. Can you picture your child sitting in one of those chairs and joining in an activity?
Ultimately, though, you know your child best. Think about what he's like when he plays with others, and when he's alone in his room. Then ask yourself the following:
1) Can my child listen to instructions and then follow them? Children need these skills to function in class, to keep up with the teacher and with their peers.
2) Is he able to put on his coat and go to the bathroom by himself? Children need to be somewhat self-sufficient by school age.
3) Can he recite the alphabet and count? Most kindergarten teachers assume that children have at least a rudimentary familiarity with the ABCs and numbers though these subjects will be covered as part of the kindergarten curriculum .
4) Can he hold a pencil? Cut with scissors? He will need these fine motor skills to begin working on writing the alphabet and to keep up with classroom projects.
5) Does he show an interest in books? Does he try to "read" a book by telling a story based on the pictures? This is a sign that his language development is on a par with other kindergartners and that he's ready to start learning how to read.
6) Is he curious and receptive to learning new things? If a child's curiosity is stronger than his fear of the unfamiliar, he will do well in school.
7) Does he get along well with other kids? Does he share and know how to take turns? He'll be interacting with other children all day, so your child's social skills are particularly important for success in school.
8) Can he work together with others as part of a group? The ability to put his needs second, to compromise and join in a consensus with other children, is also part of emotional competence.
If you answered "yes" to most of these questions and "sometimes" to the rest, your child is ready for kindergarten. If not, your child might well benefit from another year of preschool, or from one of the transitional or pre-K classes now being offered by many private schools.
Will my child have to take a screening test?
It depends on your school district. Many public and most private schools use assessment tests to determine kindergarten readiness. Usually, these screenings take place sometime after the first of the year. Your child will be asked questions to test his cognitive abilities, such as naming colors and shapes or telling a story. He'll also be asked to perform certain tasks like drawing shapes, sorting objects, or hopping in a straight line. If your school does not screen children, then you can arrange to have your child evaluated privately. Ask your pediatrician for a referral to a child psychologist.
Once the screening is complete, you can ask to see the results. If you wish, you can discuss them with the head of your child's preschool or the principal of the elementary school your child will be attending to see if these professionals recommend that your child begin kindergarten next year.
Member Comments
My younger daughter misses our state's cutoff by 4 days. We've found a private school that's willing to screen her to see if she can go to K in 2012/2013 there since she can't get into our local charter school. I do not want my blonde haired, blue eyed girl being the oldest in the class, being the first to hit puberty and get all the boys' (and mean girls') attention, especially if she's bored academically.
{"ajaxResult": { "errors": "", "addedItemId": "", "loggedIn": "false", "url": "" } }
Was this comment helpful?
Thank you!
This is typical educational pyscho-babble. Trust me, unless you live in a very low socio-economic area, if your child arrives in K only being able to recite the ABC, he/she is goign to be way behind at the start.
Having put three kids through K in middle to high-middle income areas, I can tell you that unless you want your kid to be in the lwo reading gorup, he'd better walk into the first day of kindergarten able to identify every letter of the alphabet, be able to tell you its sound, and the able to coutn to and recognize on sight numbers to 20. Oh, and kids are expected to be able to write their first name, with one capital letter and the rest lower-case, when they walk in the door.
If you want your kid to be one of the more advanced kids in class, he's better be reading "Go Dog Go" on the first day of class. I'm not kidding. In my youngest son's K class, out of 20 kids, six walked in reading independently.
Behind the Scenes
Shop Diapers.com
All contents copyright © BabyCenter LLC. 1997-2012 All rights reserved.
This Internet site provides information of a general nature and is designed for educational purposes only. If you have any concerns about your own health or the health of your child, you should always consult with a physician or other healthcare professional. Please review the Terms of Use before using this site. Your use of the site indicates your agreement to be bound by the Terms of Use .
This site is published by BabyCenter, L.L.C., which is responsible for its contents as further described and qualified in the Terms of Use .