Try an Alternative Treatment for ADHD
(Without all those prescription side effects!)
A Safe and Effective Option
(Because It's Your Child's Health!!!!)
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder or ADHD affects 3-5% of all children. It is often misdiagnosed and treatment is not always effective.
The condition is frustrating for the child, the parent and the rest of the family. Teachers, physicians and other healthcare professionals become frustrated, as well.
To achieve the best results, everyone in the child's environment needs to work together.
If your Child has ADHD , he or she needs your help, guidance and understanding. I know from personal experience how difficult it is to raise a child with ADHD. My goal here on this site is to help you, the parent, learn about the condition and understand the treatment options.
The most common symptoms of ADHD are:
But your child might not have all of these behavioral problems. Some kids are primarily hyperactive. Others get sidetracked easily, become bored or daydream, when they should be learning a new skill.
Impulsive behaviors are sometimes difficult to identify. All of us act without thinking, sometimes. That's one reason that ADHD is difficult to diagnose. The behavioral characteristics that accompany the condition are present in everyone, from time to time.
But, when a child's impulsivity, hyperactivity or inability to concentrate begins to affect his performance at school or his relationship with family and friends, then professional help is needed. That does not necessarily mean that they require medication. Sometimes, doctors and parents quickly turn to prescription medications, without first considering all of their options, such as a natural treatment for ADHD.
So why consider an alternative treatment for ADHD?
You need to remember that the stimulant drugs that are used to treat ADHD are not a "cure" . In some cases, they help. In others, they create more problems. We tried the drugs, but even at the lowest dosage, my normally happy son came home from school in tears, every single day. Some kids simply cannot tolerate any stimulant, no matter how low the dosage.
A more holistic approach,(which is an alternative treatment for ADHD) treating the "whole" child, worked for us. Numerous studies have shown that medication alone is not the most effective treatment plan. It may be a quick and easy solution, but there are no "magic pills".
Many factors may play a role in your child's behavioral problems. Diet is often part of the problem. Too much sugar, artificial colors and preservatives increase irritability, hyperactivity and impulsivity. Good nutrition is of the utmost importance. Kids need to eat right and take a good multi-vitamin, as well as an omega-3 or fish oil supplement.
If your child is hyperactive in school, change your routine. Get up early in the morning. Go for a brisk walk or run before school. Get him involved in an organized sport, karate or other physical activity that will help him or her "burn-off" some of that restless energy.
Try an alternative treatment for ADHD such as natural herbal remedies before you turn to prescription medication . It has always seemed illogical to me to give a child stimulants. But, there are many herbs and botanical extracts that are "soothing". Here's a look at some of them.
Known to reduce restlessness and over-excitability, this homeopathic remedy showed positive results in a controlled study conducted in 1997. In general, the plant extract reduces outbursts, fidgeting and hyperactive behaviors.
This alternative treatment for ADHD is traditionally recommended for those who need constant stimulation or change, in other words, for those who get "bored" easily. It is also beneficial for the relief of irritability, destructive behaviors and feelings of discontent.
Arsen iod:
This extract promotes balance, reduces temperamental outbursts or temper tantrums. It also tends to reduce frustration that can occur when learning new skills.
Verta alb:
Used to soothe the nerves, verta alb is often recommended by homeopaths, as an alternative treatment for ADHD, for hyperactive children.
Now, all of these alternative treatments for ADHD must be properly prepared according to the Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia and you should only purchase the remedy from a reliable manufacturer.
We have had a great deal of success with the products from Native Remedies . They are carefully prepared in registered facilities and meet with FDA approval .
All of their products are backed by a one year, unconditional money back guarantee. The prices are reasonable and the quality is unquestionable.
If your child has been diagnosed with ADHD or you have noticed the behavioral problems that typically accompany the condition, Visit Native Remedies , learn more about ADHD and read the testimonials written by other parents. Both you and your child will be glad that you made the effort.
All information provided in this website is provided for educational, referential and informational purposes only. It is considered a "non-medical" source of information and is not intended to be used for diagnosing, prescribing, treating,curing or preventing any disease or illness or individual health problem. Consult your own physician regarding the treatment of any medical condition.