Homeschool 101
A primer for your family
Are you considering homeschooling your child? If so, you're not alone. The number of families in the U.S. who homeschool their children has increased 34 percent since 2000. It is the fastest-rising trend in education, though homeschooling is no longer considered a fad. In fact, many of the major thinkers of the 20th century were homeschooled, including Albert Einstein, Plato, Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin.     Today's homeschool graduates are doing well. A recent study reported that adults who were homeschooled are more involved in their communities (71 percent participate in community service versus 37 percent of traditional public school graduates) and more vote in elections than public school grads (76 percent versus 29 percent). Not only are they active in the community, they are 35 percent more likely to attend college than their traditional-school counterparts.
Who homeschools? Homeschooling is no longer only for the wealthy elite or the devoutly religious. Homeschooling families have become very diverse with one key commonality: a desire to provide the best education possible for their children. There are many reasons that families choose to homeschool, but these reasons generally fall under two distinct categories: native homeschoolers and refugee homeschoolers.     Native homeschoolers are parents who either have dreamed of homeschooling since the day they found out that they were expecting or those who had a personal epiphany at some point while raising their children. These parents often want their children to learn in a more comfortable, natural environment. Others want to be able to tailor the curriculum to their child and avoid time wasters like busywork.     Refugee homeschoolers are parents who never thought they'd homeschool, but took the plunge because, as one mom put it, "attending traditional school was actively hurting my child." These children may have medical conditions, might have been bullied or may have attention issues.
Why homeschool?
&gt; A flexible schedule Do you want to travel with your child? Does your child's chronic illness make regular attendance at school difficult? Maybe you need more time for your child's outside interests (acting, modeling, motocross, etc.). In today's fast-paced world, many children are not getting adequate rest. Since one-on-one tutoring is so time efficient, your child has more time for sleep, recreation and family.
&gt; Personalized, natural learning A homeschooled child can move from one task to another when the time is right, not when the bell rings. Since the parent knows the child so well, homeschooled families can modify the curriculum to meet the unique needs of their child.
&gt; Master, then move on! What happens in many traditional classrooms if your child has mastered his grade's content standards in the middle of the year? Often, he is given more of the same work to do (but now it's called "enrichment!"). It's very hard for traditional schools to accelerate a child who is ready, just as it's hard for these schools to make progress with children who are significantly behind. Homeschooling allows a child to begin where he or she is - at, above or below grade level - and master each skill before moving on.
&gt; Family values can be taught Many parents want to be able to read Bible-based stories during reading time or discuss historical events through the lens of their faith. Homeschooling allows this. In addition, home education can protect children from a fast-paced media culture in which they are often forced to grow up too quickly.
What about socialization? This is probably the most common question homeschooling parents get. Homeschooled children get the opportunity to interact with all ages of people, often making them more comfortable in diverse social situations than their "regular-schooled" peers.     Most homeschool parents I know have kids who are involved in league or travel sports, drama, youth groups, Scouts, 4H and many other social endeavors. Many homeschoolers have packed schedules every day from 3 to 8 p.m. in extra- curricular activities. Also, homeschooling families are wonderful networkers. Almost every community has an organized homeschool group with park days, community events, activities and even co-op classes.
Homeschooling options
&gt; District Independent Study Program (ISP) Most school districts offer limited numbers of spaces for what they term "independent study" students. These district programs offer the same curriculum as the local school, which can be helpful if you think you might only homeschool for a semester or two. Sometimes, district programs provide classes and events for their homeschooled students.
&gt; Charter Schools Charter schools are free, state-funded public schools that are allowed to operate with more flexibility than traditional public schools. There are a number of "personalized learning" charter schools in California that specialize in supporting homeschoolers. These schools usually offer learning center classes, field trips and enrichment course options throughout the community, along with a wider selection of curricula than most district ISPs.
&gt; Private Independent Study Program (ISP) Many private schools offer secular or sectarian-based curricula with or without the support of a qualified teacher. These schools charge tuition, but are often much less expensive than traditional private schools.
&gt; Independent Homeschool Any family can homeschool independently by filing a "Private School Affidavit" form with the California Department of Education . This option provides the most freedom but no support.
IS HOMESCHOOLING RIGHT FOR YOU ? Homeschooling is not a decision that should be made lightly. It takes a tremendous commitment from the parent opting to take on the role of teacher.  Here are questions to help you make this important decision:
&gt; Do you have sufficient time?  Obviously, you must be home for a large part of the day and able to devote several hours to instruction, monitoring and assisting your child with his or her studies.
&gt; Do you have the necessary knowledge? While it's easier to teach lower-level students, homeschooling can challenge a parent who is not proficient in a particular field of study. Consider enlisting a tutor for help.
&gt; Do you have enough patience? You must also have the temperament for teaching. Patience and understanding are key requirements.
Readers Feedback:
I really like this article! I plan on homeschooling my children, and this is such an encouragement for me. Sometimes I get criticism from family members about homeschooling. This was just another way of realizing I truly want to teach my own children.