The Negative Effects and Aspects of Homeschooling
More parents are choosing to homeschool their children because they see the many benefits of homeschooling, differences in ideology and issues with public school policy are only a few reasons why some parents choose homeschooling over public or private schools. When considering enrolling a child in a homeschool curriculum, there are many different factors to consider. While there are many positive aspects of homeschooling, there are also the negative aspects of homeschooling. In this article, we will explore some of the disadvantages of homeschooling.
When parents take the responsibility of educating their children at home, they may need to set aside time to make it work. The task of homeschooling a child is certainly not easy, especially for working parents, single parents or stay-at-home parents. They have to take time to organize and prepare lessons, teach, give tests, and plan field trips. Homeschooling is a full-time commitment and to make sure that the child receives a quality education, parents need to invest time and effort needed.
In comparison to public schools, where education is free, homeschooling can be costly. Purchasing the newest curriculum and teaching tools can be very expensive. Parents may choose to use a paid homeschooling program, such programs may have added benefits, but may increase the cost of the child's education. There are also other costs to keep in mind, like project materials, stationery, books, computer software, and field trips. Parents who choose to home school their children should be prepared to spend more money than parents who send their children to public schools.
Home schooled children may not have as many opportunities to interact with other children in comparison to children who attend regular schools. Forming bonds and socializing with children their own age is important for the child's developmental health and development of social skills. If home schooled, they may be deprived of the chance to form friendships and may suffer socially. Of course, they can make friends with other home schooled children, but it is quite different when special effort has to be made to arrange meetings. The lack of socialization may affect them in later stages of life.
Lack of Facilities
It is quite impossible that a home can be as well-equipped as a regular school in terms of facilities. For classes that require experiments like physics and chemistry, it can be hard to get all the necessary chemicals, materials, apparatus, and so on. The home would also lack facilities for sports like swimming pools, running tracks, gyms, and fields.
One of the reasons why homeschooling is bad is the fact that parents may lose patience when they are trying to educate their children. Some parents may be too overbearing or impatient, which may cause the child to react in a negative manner. It is may be hard for parents to draw the line between educator and parent in the child's mind.
One of the most glaring negative effects of homeschooling is the matter of motivation. Some children need to be challenged to excel in their studies. In this sense, they thrive when they are involved in some competition. Children who are homeschooled would not have this motivation because most of them are educated separately.
Follow these links to learn more about the homeschooling versus public school debate.