Hooked On Phonics
Hooked On Phonics Hooked on Phonics is an award-winning program that uses proven learning methods to provide 4- to 8-year-olds with a strong foundation in phonics and reading. With a step-by-step approach, kids learn about letters and sounds, learn how to put them together to form words, and then read great stories and books. Because kids learn in different ways, the program includes a variety of multisensory tools that appeal to visual, auditory, and experience-based learners. Hooked on Phonics includes a variety of original books with colorful illustrations and friendly characters that engage readers, and teach kids the basic skills needed to become confident readers now and in the future. Hooked on Phonics also has packages for mathematics, covering addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Hooked on Phonics is an award-winning program that uses proven learning methods to provide 4- to 8-year-olds with a strong foundation in phonics and reading. With a step-by-step approach, kids learn about letters and sounds, learn how to put them together to form words, and then read great stories and books. Because kids learn in different ways, the program includes a variety of multisensory tools that appeal to visual, auditory, and experience-based learners. Hooked on Phonics includes a variety of original books with colorful illustrations and friendly characters that engage readers, and teach kids the basic skills needed to become confident readers now and in the future. Hooked on Phonics also has packages for mathematics, covering addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Phonics is the association between the letters in our alphabet and the sounds in our spoken language. Research has shown that a strong understanding of the relationship between letters and sounds helps children learn to read. That's because the sounds letters make are the building blocks of words. For example, by combining the sounds made by the letters c, a, t , children can read cat . When children learn to recognize letter sounds and combine them to read words, they are developing important skills they need for learning to read. Research has demonstrated that a strong understanding of the relationship between letters and sounds is fundamental in learning to read, and that exposure to reading helps reinforce these fundamental skills. Hooked on Phonics programs combine practice in decoding and pronouncing words with reading books to allow children to use these skills in reading for meaning.
What makes Hooked on Phonics unique is the proven learn-practice-play approach. Children are given bite-sized pieces of new information in every lesson so they are able to master the new concept and achieve success every time. The easy-to-follow learn-practice-play approach has three steps: Learn - kids learn a new skill or concept. Practice - kids practice the concept until they master it. Play - kids read great books and play games so they can enjoy applying their new knowledge.
Hooked on Phonics was created in 1987 by a father whose son was struggling to read. To help his son, he developed a systematic in-home phonics program for children. Extensive television and radio advertising featuring the memorable 1-800-ABCDEFG phone number and the catchy "Hooked on Phonics worked for me!" tagline helped make Hooked on Phonics a household name. In the 15 years since, more than 2 million families and thousands of schools have turned to Hooked on Phonics for its growing library of educational programs, including reading, math, and study skills.
The Teachers' Choice Award celebrates products that teachers recommend to other teachers for use in the classroom. Awarded by Learning magazine, Master Reader (2004), Hooked on School Success (2003), and Hooked on Math (2001) have all been recipients. Master Reader was given the Teachers' Choice Award for the Family by Learning magazine (2004) as an educational product that teachers recommend for children's continued learning at home. Learn to Read was named one of the top 100 classroom products by Curriculum Administrator magazine (now District Administration magazine), and given the Curriculum Administrator Districts' Choice award in 2001. Learn to Read was given the Dr. Toy's Best Children's Vacation Products award by Dr. Toy in 2002. Dr. Toy selects products that are great to take along and use on a trip, and to explore once you arrive at your destination. Learn to Read was named by The National Parenting Center in 1998 as one of the finest products and services being marketed to the parent/child audience, and given the National Parenting Center Seal of Approval . This award signifies to parents that their peers have acknowledged a product's quality and desirability, based on a wide variety of determining factors.
Windows System Requirements Windows 98/2000/Me compatible; Pentium Class 133 MHz or higher; 32-MB RAM; 20-MB free hard-drive space; 4X CD-ROM drive; 16-bit depth graphics; 640x480 display; 16-bit sound card; Standard keyboard and mouse; 2-MB video card.
Macintosh System Requirements Mac OS version 7.6 or higher; 120-MHz PowerPC 603e or higher; 32-MB RAM; 20-MB free hard-drive space; 4X CD-ROM drive; 16-bit depth graphics; 640x480 display; 16-bit sound card; Standard keyboard and mouse; 2-MB video card.
Hooked on School Success Hooked on School Success is designed to prepare your child for success in school with fun lessons that improve organizational skills and test-taking strategies. Specially created for children ages 8 to 12, Hooked on School Success uses a revolutionary approach that helps make learning fun! Your child will make systematic progress through four learning levels on each CD-ROM. 4 workbooks with activities, 4 CD-ROMs, Progress posters to track learning success on CD-ROM, 1 Parent's guide. Level 1 focuses on improving your child's reading comprehension - the foundation for success in school. Level 2 teaches your child organizational skills, such as outlining and summarizing, along with identifying main ideas and key details. Level 3 reduces homework time by helping your child take better notes, interpret charts and graphs, and stay more focused. Level 4 brings it all together by showing your child how to apply these useful study skills the very next day. $149.95
Ages 3 to 5
Hooked on Phonics Get Ready to Read Hooked on Phonics Get Ready to Read is a fun and easy way to teach 3- to 5-year-olds the basics they need to get ready for a lifetime of reading! With Get Ready to Read kids are introduced to letter names, letter sounds, and phonemic awareness using letter and picture cards, workbooks, and CD-ROMs filled with games and alphabet songs. Plus, the program includes two original Hooked on Phonics Video Jukebox DVDs and a huge game mat for even more learning fun! 3 workbooks with stories and activities, 2 CD-ROMs with games and original alphabet songs, 3 progress posters to track learning success, 3 sets of fun stickers kids love, 2 Parent's guides, 2 sets of letter flash cards, 100 picture cards, 52 letter blocks, 2 Hooked on Phonics Video Jukebox DVDs, Bingo cards and chips, 1 game mat, 1 My Hooked on Phonics Dictionary, 1 alphabet poster. $249.95
Hooked on Phonics Get Ready to Read - Letter Names Packed with workbooks, letter cards, games, and a CD-ROM, Hooked on Phonics Get Ready to Read - Letter Names is a fun and easy way to teach 3- to 5-year-olds the basics they need to get ready for a lifetime of reading. With Get Ready to Read - Letter Names, parents and kids have tons of great letter recognition and phonemic awareness activities they can play together. 2 workbooks with coloring and matching activities, 1 CD-ROM with games and original alphabet songs, 2 progress posters to track learning success, 2 sets of fun stickers kids love, 1 Parent's guide, 2 sets of letter flash cards, 40 picture cards, 26 letter blocks, Bingo cards and chips, 1 alphabet poster. $64.95
Hooked on Phonics Get Ready to Read - Letter Sounds Hooked on Phonics Get Ready to Read - Letter Sounds teaches prereaders the skills needed to build a foundation of reading success. Kids are introduced to letter sounds and body movements using letter and picture cards, a workbook, and a CD-ROM filled with fun alphabet songs. Plus, Get Ready to Read - Letter Sounds includes an exclusive My Hooked on Phonics Dictionary featuring over 300 definitions and chalkboard pages! 1 workbook with stories and activities, 1 CD-ROM with games and original alphabet songs, 1 progress poster to track learning success, 1 set of fun stickers kids love, 1 Parent's guide, 1 set of letter flash cards, 100 picture cards, 26 letter blocks, 1 My Hooked on Phonics' Dictionary, 1 alphabet poster. $64.95
Ages 4 to 8
Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read (with CDs) Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read is an award-winning program that uses proven learning methods to provide 4- to 8-year-olds with a strong foundation in phonics and reading. With our step-by-step approach, kids learn about letters and sounds, learn how to put them together to form words, and then read great stories and books. Because kids learn in different ways, the program includes a variety of multisensory tools that appeal to visual, auditory, and experience-based learners. Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read includes a variety of original books with colorful illustrations and friendly characters that engage readers, and teach kids the basic skills needed to become confident readers now and in the future. 5 workbooks with stories and activities, 10 chapter books, 10 companion books, 30 Hooked on Phonics storybooks, 10 audio CDs, 1 CD-ROM, 6 progress posters to track learning success, 3 sets of fun stickers kids love, 3 Parent's guides, 11 flash card sets. $249.95
Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read - Kindergarten Packed with musical audio CDs, flash cards, a workbook, and a library of 24 magical books, Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read - Kindergarten is a great way to get started with basic phonics skills. Kids learn about letters and sounds, learn how to put them together to form words, and then read great stories and books using the words just learned. Plus, a CD-ROM with 28 computer activities is designed to reinforce new skills with fun games designed to be played independently. 1 workbook with stories and activities, 10 companion books, 14 Hooked on Phonics storybooks, 3 audio CDs, 1 CD-ROM, 2 progress posters to track learning success, 1 set of fun stickers kids love, 1 Parent's guide, 4 flash card sets. $64.95
Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read - First Grade Designed to teach beginning and ending sound combinations and word endings, this first-grade learn-to-read kit is loaded with audio CDs, flash cards, and workbooks to appeal to visual, auditory, and experience-based learners. Plus, kids move past just reading storybooks and are introduced to reading chapter books designed to reinforce the skills already learned. 2 workbooks with stories and activities, 6 chapter books, 8 Hooked on Phonics storybooks, 4 audio CDs, 2 progress posters to track learning success, 1 set of fun stickers kids love, 1 Parent's guide, 7 flash card sets. $99.95
Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read - Second Grade Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read - Second Grade uses proven learning methods to provide a strong foundation in phonics and reading. Using audio CDs, flash cards, and workbooks filled with activities and stories, kids learn about long vowels, complex vowels, and challenging sound combinations. Plus, with the help of adventure-filled chapter books, kids turn reading practice into reading fun! 2 workbooks with stories and activities, 4 chapter books, 8 Hooked on Phonics storybooks, 3 audio CDs, 1 progress poster to track learning success, 1 set of fun stickers kids love, 1 Parent's guide, 4 flash card sets. $99.95
Ages 7 and up
Hooked on Phonics Master Reader Hooked on Phonics Master Reader, created for kids ages 7 and up, uses advanced phonics skills designed to help kids read with speed and accuracy. Like Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read, the program uses a balanced approach, coupling systematic instruction with reading stories and books. Kids learn to break down large words into parts so they can read more fluently and don't spend so much time and effort sounding out each word. Plus, Master Reader has been tested with kids to make sure they love the four levels of interactive computer games, the 64 attention-grabbing stories, and the exciting Strange Museum chapter book series. 5 workbooks with stories and activities, 10 chapter books, 10 companion books, 30 Hooked on Phonics storybooks, 10 audio CDs, 1 CD-ROM, 6 progress posters to track learning success, 3 sets of fun stickers kids love, 3 Parent's guides, 11 flash card sets. $249.95
Ages 3 and up
Phonics Word Master Phonics Word Master teaches children the fundamental building blocks of reading: letter names, letter sounds, and beginning spelling, using the trusted Hooked on Phonics curriculum. Fun music and engaging animations entertain and the Skill Builder Review button shows off what your child just learned! Word Master comes with seven unique games: Pick A Letter?; Where Is The Letter?; Pick A Letter Sound; Where Is The Letter Sound?; Spell Out A Word; Sound Out A Word; and Alphabet Musical Medley, and features an LCD screen for visual reinforcement, a full alphabet keypad and a Skill Builder Review Button, and comes with three AA batteries. $46.95
Hooked on Phonics Touch Screen Learner Touch Screen Learner features an interactive LCD screen and 14 different learning games for children to master. Each game teaches different skills like phonemes, beginning spelling, and rhyming. Bonus games are unlocked as children succeed, encouraging them to collect more points as they learn. This portable learning tool is perfect for building skills, at home or on the go. $54.95
Hooked on Math (with CDs) Hooked on Math is designed to take kids ages 6 to 10 from basic addition and subtraction all the way through multiplication and long division, while making learning fun, not frustrating. Along with musical audio CDs, flash cards, and workbooks filled with fun lessons and activities, kids begin to build a solid foundation in the math skills they need to succeed in school. Plus, with original games like Space Bingo and Remainder Road that use play money and game pieces, kids have a fun way to reinforce the key math concepts learned. 4 workbooks with lessons and activities, 9 audio CDs, 4 progress posters to track learning success, 3 sets of fun stickers kids love, 3 parent's guides, 16 flash card sets, Play money and game pieces. $249.95
Hooked on Math Addition and Subtraction Hooked on Math Addition and Subtraction starts kids ages 6 to 7 with basic addition and subtraction and progresses to regrouping larger numbers. Through musical audio CDs, flash cards, and workbooks filled with fun lessons and activities, kids begin to build a solid foundation in the math skills they need to succeed in school. Plus, with original games like Space Bingo that use play money and game pieces, kids have a fun way to reinforce the key math concepts learned. 2 workbooks with lessons and activities, 2 audio CDs, 2 progress posters to track learning success, 2 sets of fun stickers kids love, 1 parent's guide, 4 flash card sets, Play money and game pieces. $64.95
Hooked on Math Multiplication Hooked on Math Multiplication teaches kids ages 7 to 8 single- and double-digit multiplication using audio CDs, flash cards, game pieces, and a workbook to make learning fun - not frustrating. Plus, with the Multiplication Station audio CD, kids have a fun and catchy way to remember the times tables. 1 workbook with lessons and activities, 4 audio CDs, 1 progress poster to track learning success, 1 set of fun stickers kids love, 1 parent's guide, 6 flash card sets, Play money and game pieces. $99.95
Hooked on Math Division Hooked on Math Division introduces kids ages 9 to 10 to division facts and advances to long division and remainders. Filled with musical audio CDs, flash cards, and a workbook, Hooked on Math Division is designed to be fun and easy! Plus, with original games like Space Bingo and Remainder Road that use play money and game pieces, kids have a fun way to reinforce the key math concepts learned. 1 workbook with lessons and activities, 3 audio CDs, 1 progress poster to track learning success, 1 set of fun stickers kids love, 1 parent's guide, 6 flash card sets, Play money and game pieces. $99.95