Phone: (253) 353 2761 Fax: (206) 400 1156
ESL Reading and Phonics: Software
Good reading skills are essential, and reading is the best way to improve vocabulary quickly and correctly. We feature ESL readers at all levels, as well as complete phonics courses for ESL or any beginning English student. If you have any questions or don't see what you want, please e-mail us at
sales at multilingualbooks dot com
Featured Products
Paired Reading: Positive Reading Practice Through the use of simulated tutoring demonstrations, this video describes the paired reading technique and demonstrates ways in which teachers can teach or remediate reading skills through consistent, positive reading experiences. The video may also be helpful for showing parents how they can support their children's oral reading practice at home. The International Reading Association (I.R.A.) reviews state: "This package can be executed and the program created without drawing on an external ?expert' to initiate or sustain it. This makes the package a ?good buy' for libraries and schools...The instructions on using the DVD is good and the Q/A section and sample documents are excellent...this package is one that is here to stay...and will not be outdated." . This comprehensive package, used by literary specialists across North America, is truly a valuable resource for each and every school and public library. Comes with a 30 minute DVD in two parts; included on the DVD is a 64-page manual in PDF format and sample documents that can be accessed through a computer with a DVD-ROM drive.
The Twisted Doors: The Scariest Way in the World to Learn English! The Twisted Doors: The Scariest Way in the World to Learn English! is the most creative and engaging intermediate to advanced ESL/EFL course of its time: It teaches extensive grammar, vocabulary, reading, writing, speaking, and listening by embedding an ongoing suspenseful mystery adventure, even into the grammar quizzes, dialogues, and exercises. Students are motivated to learn a chapter so that they can find out how the mystery unfolds in the next! The Twisted Doors combines an all-in-one comprehensive grammar and basic English skills textbook, an integrated mystery reader with gripping dialogues doubling as grammar quizzes, a highly illustrated activity book with hundreds of interactive quizzes and exercises (sometimes in the form of rhyming riddles, secret codes, games, crossword puzzles, word scrambles, or hidden words), and a riveting read-along audio book CD. No costly add-ons or supplements are needed since they are all incorporated and integrated into one book. Assessed at TESOL levels 3-4, progressing to level 5, The Twisted Doors is a must-have for intermediate to advanced ESL middle and high school students worldwide, advanced adult self-learners, adults in ESL literacy programs, international students in the US, and overseas English-language learners.
Hooked on Phonics Get Ready to Read for ages 3 to 5 Hooked on Phonics Get Ready to Read is a fun and easy way to teach 3- to 5-year-olds the basics they need to get ready for a lifetime of reading! With Get Ready to Read kids are introduced to letter names, letter sounds, and phonemic awareness using letter and picture cards, workbooks, and CD-ROMs filled with games and alphabet songs. Plus, the program includes two original Hooked on Phonics Video Jukebox DVDs and a huge game mat for even more learning fun! 3 workbooks with stories and activities, 2 CD-ROMs with games and original alphabet songs, 3 progress posters to track learning success, 3 sets of fun stickers kids love, 2 Parent?s guides, 2 sets of letter flash cards, 100 picture cards, 52 letter blocks, 2 Hooked on Phonics Video Jukebox DVDs, Bingo cards and chips, 1 game mat, 1 My Hooked on Phonics Dictionary, 1 alphabet poster.
Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read (with CDs) for ages 4 to 8 Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read is an award-winning program that uses proven learning methods to provide 4- to 8-year-olds with a strong foundation in phonics and reading. With our step-by-step approach, kids learn about letters and sounds, learn how to put them together to form words, and then read great stories and books. Because kids learn in different ways, the program includes a variety of multisensory tools that appeal to visual, auditory, and experience-based learners. Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read includes a variety of original books with colorful illustrations and friendly characters that engage readers, and teach kids the basic skills needed to become confident readers now and in the future. 5 workbooks with stories and activities, 10 chapter books, 10 companion books, 30 Hooked on Phonics storybooks, 10 audio CDs, 1 CD-ROM, 6 progress posters to track learning success, 3 sets of fun stickers kids love, 3 Parent's guides, 11 flash card sets.
Hooked on Phonics Master Reader for ages 7 and up Hooked on Phonics Master Reader, created for kids ages 7 and up, uses advanced phonics skills designed to help kids read with speed and accuracy. Like Hooked on Phonics Learn to Read, the program uses a balanced approach, coupling systematic instruction with reading stories and books. Kids learn to break down large words into parts so they can read more fluently and don?t spend so much time and effort sounding out each word. Plus, Master Reader has been tested with kids to make sure they love the four levels of interactive computer games, the 64 attention-grabbing stories, and the exciting Strange Museum chapter book series. 5 workbooks with stories and activities, 10 chapter books, 10 companion books, 30 Hooked on Phonics storybooks, 10 audio CDs, 1 CD-ROM, 6 progress posters to track learning success, 3 sets of fun stickers kids love, 3 Parent's guides, 11 flash card sets.
Phonics Word Master For ages 3 and up. Phonics Word Master teaches children the fundamental building blocks of reading: letter names, letter sounds, and beginning spelling, using the trusted Hooked on Phonics curriculum. Fun music and engaging animations entertain and the Skill Builder Review button shows off what your child just learned! Word Master comes with seven unique games: Pick A Letter?; Where Is The Letter?; Pick A Letter Sound; Where Is The Letter Sound?; Spell Out A Word; Sound Out A Word; and Alphabet Musical Medley, and features an LCD screen for visual reinforcement, a full alphabet keypad and a Skill Builder Review Button, and comes with three AA batteries.
Hooked on Phonics Touch Screen Learner For ages 4 and up. Touch Screen Learner features an interactive LCD screen and 14 different learning games for children to master. Each game teaches different skills like phonemes, beginning spelling, and rhyming. Bonus games are unlocked as children succeed, encouraging them to collect more points as they learn. This portable learning tool is perfect for building skills, at home or on the go.
PhonicsQ Phonics System PhonicsQ is an exciting new phonics system for classroom or home use. Just as students need to have a comfortable familiarity with numbers in order to do math, they need such familiarity with letters and sounds to read and write. PhonicsQ is designed to provide consistent visual cues to help students remember the sounds of the letters and letter combinations. Includes flash cards, 4 full size color posters, phonics audio cassette, black line (reproduceable) master handout sheets and manual.