Copyright Material in our website is copyright. However, all articles, listings and other material from this website may be printed out and copied by teachers for personal or professional use (meetings, courses, etc.) provided that our web address www.dyslexia-teacher.com is clearly included in the copy.
www.dyslexia-teacher.com supporting the dyslexic pupil
DYSLEXIA TEACHER
DYSLEXIA RESOURCES
Dyslexia Consultants Aberdeen take a holistic approach to dyslexia treatment, with services and support that focus on comprehension and improvement through cognitive therapy and specialised academic resources.
Through our dyslexia screening, dyslexia assessments, workplace dyslexia assessments, and the dyslexia resources in our dyslexia shop, we can help those affected with dyslexia difficulties .
We supply Recognised Psychometric and Educational Assessments, Nessy typing tutor, Nessy games, Reading rulers, coloured overlays, Irlens Pukka pads, and Assistive Software.
SYSTEMATIC PHONICS Phonics are especially helpful for children with dyslexia. A wide range of information about Systematic Phonics is to be found on our website Systematic Phonics . You will also find techniques to use, games and activities.
ORTON-GILLINGHAM (US) The Institute for Multi-Sensory Education (IMSE) has developed a program to empower parents to give their children a head start on the basics of reading, to support beginning readers, and to assist children who are struggling with the reading process. The Orton-Gillingham method is language-based and success-oriented. The student is directly taught reading, handwriting and written expression as one logical body of knowledge. Learners move step by step from simple to more complex material in a sequential, logical manner that enables students to master important literacy skills. 'Sensational Strategies for Teaching Beginning Readers' . (Comments/reviews welcome)
HOOKED ON PHONICS (US) A program for Dyslexic learners is 'Hooked on Phonics', and you can see details at their website Hooked on Phonics (Comments/reviews welcome)
SRA OPEN COURT PHONICS REVIEW KIT (US) Widely used graded reading scheme for K-6, with the emphasis on interest and motivation rather than phonics. Open Court's new reading, writing, and learning program, provides young readers with a solid foundation in phonics. Children develop print and phonemic awareness and learn about how the alphabet works. They are explicitly taught about sound/letter associations and how to blend sounds and letters to read words. Children also have regular opportunities to use this knowledge in reading connected text and in spelling. Open Court Phonics . (Comments/reviews welcome)
GO PHONICS (US) Teacher-developed to provide struggling and natural beginning readers with a strong foundation for decoding the English language. Skills are taught sequentially, one step at a time. With over 70 components, Go Phonics features 48 games that integrate with its workbooks and decodable storybooks. Go Phonics (Comments/reviews welcome)
CATCH UP (UK) A phonics kit programme with CD-Roms designed to help the one in five of 6-11 year olds who struggle with their reading. The Programme has been developed out of detailed academic research and extensive practical experience and can be delivered by teachers or teaching assistants. It is based on one or two individual 10 minute sessions a week (15 minutes for 10-11 year olds). There is also an optional 20 minute group session. 'Recommended' L.L., UK. (Comments/reviews welcome)
READING RECOVERY (US) Reading Recovery is an early intervention program designed by Marie M. Clay (1979, 1985) to assist children in first grade who are having difficulty learning to read and write. Reading Recovery (Comments/reviews welcome)
SPARK ISLAND (ages 5-11) BBC CD-Roms program - 'an excellent tool to assist in some of phonological awareness difficulties as they teach phonic rules in a game-like multi-sensory way (young learners).' (D.D., Singapore) Spark Island (More comments/reviews welcome)
THE PATTERNS OF ENGLISH SPELLING (US) by Don McCabe, published by the AVKO Dyslexia Research Foundation. This reference tool lists words by patterns together. You can download sample pages from this book at www.spelling.org (Comments/reviews welcome)
CD WITH OVER 350 RESOURCES FOR DYSLEXIC PUPILS (UK) The resources on this CD Posters include over 50 A4 posters of Pictures &amp; Mnemonics for Sight Words, Sheets on activities to consolidate Sight Words and Sound Work, Words and Sentences for each phonic pattern, and much more. Spellings are UK, and the cost is £10. Helping Dyslexia (Comments/reviews welcome)
GOLDEN KEY SPELLING RULES (UK) 35 basic spelling rules explained in simple terms. Contains photo-copiable worksheets for the exercises, word games and puzzles. Available through Better Books . (Comments/reviews welcome)
CROSSBOW EDUCATION (UK) A range of games and photocopiable materials designed by experienced special needs teachers for helping overcome literacy and numeracy difficulties. Established in 1993; widely recommended in the UK by specialist teachers and other professionals. Crossbow Education . - 'An amazing range of phonic games, puzzles, matching cards, etc. - invaluable to anyone helping dyslexic children.' John Bradford, Direct Learning.
PHOTOCOPIABLE WORKSHEETS (UK) By Hilda King Educational. Using the concept of fruit trees, in which the pupil fills in missing letters/words, these worksheets help teach a variety of vowel and consonant combinations. Available from Hilda King . (Comments/reviews welcome)
KICKSTART PUBLICATIONS (UK) Designed for pupils having Specific Learning Difficulties. This book covers b-d confusion, consonant digraphs ch, ph, sh, th, wh, and the magic e rule with vowels a,i,o,u. Available from KickStart Publications . (Comments/reviews welcome)
BARRINGTON STOKE BOOKS (UK) Barrington Stoke specialize in story books for young people who are late starting to read or may suffer from Irlen Syndrome. The pages are off-white to stop the glare, and the print is double-spaced. The story books are aimed at 'reluctant readers' aged 8 to 13 with a reading age of above 8 years. They publish a series of books, the most well-known of which is " Screw Loose " by Alison Prince, published by Barrington Stoke (ISBN 1902260015).You can see an article about their website in Dyslexia Online Magazine (Other comments/reviews welcome)
TEXTHELP (Worldwide) This computer program sits alongside a normal word-processor, like 'Office', and helps the child or student to find spellings as they type. There is a small box on the screen which attempts to guess each word as the person starts to type it. For example, if you type in 'b', it will come up with a list of words you have used before beginning with 'b', like big, better, beginning, etc. If one of these is the word you need, you can select it, and the word will go straight into where you are typing.
As you type more letters, the guesses get better. At the end of each session you are asked to save your spellings so that the program can begin to learn your particular vocabulary and make better guesses based on the words you use most frequently.
It can also read out what you have written so far - a very popular feature with children - so that you can hear if you have missed out any words or put in a wrong word. There are two versions - TextHelp Read and Write and Type and Talk. You can see details at TextHelp . Highly recommended. (John Bradford) (More comments/reviews welcome)
CONFUSING LETTERS (UK) This series of books focuses on letters which pupils often find particularly confusing - b/d, p/q, etc. - and aims to help them to feel confident in recognising and writing the letters both in isolation and in text. Recommended series of four books - John Bradford. Available from Learning Meterials for Special Needs . (Comments/reviews welcome)
SUPPORT FOR BASIC SPELLING (UK) Series of six photocopy masters supports the teaching of basic spelling skills and has been developed to take into account the requirements of the UK National Curriculum and the objectives of the UK National Literacy Strategy Framework. The books are incremental in difficulty and can be used to complement the work being undertaken from any spelling programme to provide additional learning opportunities. Assessment pages and record sheets are included in each book to provide convenient ways of recording pupils' progress. Each book costs 12.50. Recommended positive worksheets - John Bradford. Available from Learning Meterials for Special Needs . (Comments/reviews welcome)
ALPHASMART The AlphaSmart 3000 allows you to enter and edit text, then send it to any computer for formatting or directly to a printer. Its portability allows students to use it anywhere and anytime - in the classroom, at home, or on field trips. Its low cost allows you to provide technology access to an entire classroom of 30 students for the price of three to four computers. The AlphaSmart 3000 is a smart way to extend your technology dollars, to increase technology access, and to alleviate the equity issues at school. AlphaSmart
TOE BY TOE (UK) This is a highly structured multi-sensory reading and spelling program for parents and teachers. It is ideal for parents who desire resources for home-based support for their dyslexic children. It is an inexpensive program, which Keda developed over many years teaching the dyslexic. The lessons are given daily and are twenty minutes in length. The book is self-contained. Keda says that the book is able to be used anywhere and can be used with or without a trained teacher. It is used in Kenya, and has a home course to supplement schoolwork. The parents who use it speak enthusiastically to me about the progress their children are making. It does require a commitment by parents and students to work through the program but I'm told that the benefits are well worth the effort. (William Ferguson) - Toe By Toe (Comments/reviews welcome)
CALSC Communication and Learning Skills Centre (UK) produce a range of computer programs and materials to help teachers and speech and language therapists to improve the memory, recall and learning skills of their pupils, students and adult clients. The Memory Bricks Manual , for example, is suitable for pre-school and primary aged children to improve their working memory skills . Mastering Memory helps improve auditory and/or visual short-term memory skills, with a computer program and manual which shows you how to teach memory strategies. The C-cards Manua l Includes cards to help teach organisation and classification skills which can help improve memory skills, and word-finding difficulties. CALSC (Comments/reviews welcome)
LDLearning (US) Source for a range of workbooks, flashcards, study guides, and other educational tools for students with learning disabilities and Attention Deficit Disorder. LDLearning.com (Comments/reviews welcome)
Mrs Alphabet (US) Online resource designed for teachers at the primary levels. This site was created by Anne Lynch, an author and creator of children's books, learning tools, and educational materials to assist kids in early learning and successful progress in alphabet recognition, phonics and beginning reading. This website contains a variety of lesson plans, links to other beneficial sites, a newsletter, and a section for kids structured around the alphabet. This site has another interesting feature called the classroom. In this section, there are multiple ideas about creating word walls, name activities, alphabet jobs, calendars, and it provides sample portfolios for teachers to view. Mrs Alphabet
Pencil grips These useful aids provide help for a child who grips their pencil or pen too tightly. UK | USA
LETTERBOX (UK) Teaching aid made of sturdy, heavy duty plastic. Suitable for all ages from three through adulthood, it teaches students to develop reading, spelling and math skills.  The box lid provides a storage and display area for the letters, numbers, punctuation and common letter pairs. These are printed on tough, durable plastic strips which are held in place by metal spring tabs so that they will not fall out. The base provides a work area with seven rows which hold words, sentences or sums in place. Letterbox Learning (Comments/reviews welcome)
Puzzle Maker Puzzle creation tool for teachers and parents. Create and print customized word search, crossword puzzles using your own word lists. Puzzle Maker
• Child 1st Publications - educational publisher that produces multisensory materials to help those who struggle with traditional methods of teaching, whether they are visual or right brain learners, or have dyslexia, ADD, or ADHD. Products designed to integrate explicit phonics instruction with specific strategies (visuals, movement, storytelling, humor, rhyme, and patterns) to engage children with a variety of learning strengths. .