COMPUTER EXPLORERS of Hockessin
Computer Explorers gives kids hands-on experience with technology, boosting creativity and learning
It's easy to think that kids today are all masters of the online world since they've grown up with the Internet, seem to live on social media and have access to an array of devices that keep them connected at all times.
Truth is, today's kids may be online a lot, but they're not necessarily blazing new creative trails.
Andra Brichacek of the International Society for Technology in Education wrote last year that students today "are far more comfortable and proficient with technology than older generations could ever hope to be. Some research, however, has concluded that, while the Net Generation may indeed be adept at cutting and pasting, texting, Googling, and Facebooking, their range of skills does not necessarily extend to more complex technological tasks."
As one commenter on her story noted, "How many can touch-type, add an attachment to an email, or be more creative and manipulate an image or create a film or song from scratch?"
That's where Computer Explorers can help, by offering the best computer classes for kids in Hockessin.
The hands-on classes let students have fun while learning the science, technology, math and engineering skills that will help them succeed.
Take a look at some of the courses we offer:
• Rocketeering: Kids get to build - and launch - their own model rocket using compressed air. Along the way, they learn about aeronautics, thrust, drag and ballast.
• Robotics: Yes, you can build and program your own robot, using a teaching system developed by experts at MIT. Using the LEGO WeDo  Robotics System, students learn engineering and programming.
• Video Game Animation: Have you ever wondered what goes into making a video game a reality? We offer courses that allow students to create their own characters that dance and interact with one another, and by the time the course is over, students will have a playable video game that they can post online. In the meantime, they boost their programming and visual arts skills.
• Build your own App: Kids will learn how to create their own math practicing apps, voice recognition, remote controller, compass, and altimeter apps. Do you have a budding entrepreneur on your hands? A lot of businesses are eager to get their own mobile app. This program can put your kid way ahead of the curve.
• Digital Moviemaking: Students create their own characters, costumes and sets, use a digital camera to record the action, then digital editing to give their work a final polish. Creativity fuels this course, which teaches technical skills that students can use to bring their stories into the world.
That's just a tiny fraction of what Computer Explorers offers. Computer Explorers is an international education company that uses proprietary, state-of-the-art curricula and cutting edge technology to give over 33,000 students a competitive edge in math, reading, science and other core academic subjects. Computer Explorers offers technology classes for after school programs, summer camps, and recreation/community centers and more.
Interested in one of our programs? Visit http://computerexplorers.com/delaware/computer-explorers-of-new-castle-county or call, 302-234-1257.
The Khan Academy is an organization on a mission. They are a not-for-profit with the goal of changing education for the better by providing a free world-class education to anyone anywhere. All of the site's resources are available to anyone. It doesn't matter if you are a student, teacher, home-schooler, principal, adult returning to the classroom after 20 years, or a friendly alien just trying to get a leg up in earthly biology. The Khan Academy's materials and resources are available to you completely free of charge. Here is Sal Khan, the founder, and Stanford professors Peter Norvig and Sebastian Thrun discussing the future of technology in education. They took questions live from universities during a Google+ hang out. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LtmdiPUGGe8
Free online portal of safe and educational sites with enrollment in Computer Explorers classes for children
Children today should not miss learning opportunities and educational aids that the Internet provides. But how can parents protect their children from inappropriate content and find solid material without spending hours on it themselves?
Quickly - through one portal - if they have any children enrolled in Computer Explorers program and classes.
Computer Explorers' eTots program gives parents free access to vetted and verified online content that is both educational and safe. Parents and their children go directly to carefully selected activities and games - not home pages.
The goal is to provide good learning options, taking children directly to activities on the Internet that are educationally sound. The portal provides a range of educational and research sites that give students the best of the Internet so parents don't struggle to locate what they need.
CE's portal directs children and their parents to activities on sites sponsored by Sesame Street, the BBC, PBS, Nickelodeon as well as national and regional children's museums - all in one convenient place. Parents can work through material with their youngsters or allow them to learn at their own pace knowing the content has been screened. The links are chosen based on their ability to increase a child's academic readiness in reading, math, science, social studies, art or music.
Families with children ages three to five enrolled in any Computer Explorers class or program receive free access to eTots. Education experts at Computer Explorers have reviewed and verified all the content, lessons and activities as safe and age-appropriate.
Used correctly, the Internet can increase the speed of learning. The inappropriate and harmful content out there at times discourages parents, but eTots makes it possible to have safe boundaries.
The local Computer Explorers uses technology in creative ways to engage students in science, math, English and other core academic subjects. It offers after-school programs, recreation center classes, preschool options and summer camps. eTots is an extra benefit created in response to questions from parents about what they can do online with their young children at home.
Computer Explorers developed the eTots program in 2010 to help parents find appropriate sites without spending hours searching the web themselves.
Children who have access to the Internet are going to explore and having eTots gives helpful direction rather than turning them loose or playing the same online games over and over. A child's natural instinct is to want to discover,  and eTots is great for that.
Free online portal of safe and educational sites with enrollment in Computer Explorers classes for children
Children today should not miss learning opportunities and educational aids that the Internet provides. But how can parents protect their children from inappropriate content and find solid material without spending hours on it themselves?
Quickly - through one portal - if they have any children enrolled in Computer Explorers program and classes.
Computer Explorers' eTots program gives parents free access to vetted and verified online content that is both educational and safe. Parents and their children go directly to carefully selected activities and games - not home pages.
The goal is to provide good learning options, taking children directly to activities on the Internet that are educationally sound. The portal provides a range of educational and research sites that give students the best of the Internet so parents don't struggle to locate what they need.
CE's portal directs children and their parents to activities on sites sponsored by Sesame Street, the BBC, PBS, Nickelodeon as well as national and regional children's museums - all in one convenient place. Parents can work through material with their youngsters or allow them to learn at their own pace knowing the content has been screened. The links are chosen based on their ability to increase a child's academic readiness in reading, math, science, social studies, art or music.
Families with children ages three to five enrolled in any Computer Explorers class or program receive free access to eTots. Education experts at Computer Explorers have reviewed and verified all the content, lessons and activities as safe and age-appropriate.
Used correctly, the Internet can increase the speed of learning. The inappropriate and harmful content out there at times discourages parents, but eTots makes it possible to have safe boundaries.
The local Computer Explorers uses technology in creative ways to engage students in science, math, English and other core academic subjects. It offers after-school programs, recreation center classes, preschool options and summer camps. eTots is an extra benefit created in response to questions from parents about what they can do online with their young children at home.
Computer Explorers developed the eTots program in 2010 to help parents find appropriate sites without spending hours searching the web themselves.
Children who have access to the Internet are going to explore and having eTots gives helpful direction rather than turning them loose or playing the same online games over and over. A child's natural instinct is to want to discover,  and eTots is great for that.
Is your child Facebook friends with teachers? Do your students or children open the files of their peers on shared computers or networks? Do they understand that school computers and the work they do on them are school property?
A controversial new Missouri law that tries to restrict teachers and students from becoming social media "friends" puts a new spin on a sticky issue - how to leverage technology's immense power for education while also teaching how to use it responsibly.
For parents, the issues may seem overwhelming. For Computer Explorers, the answers are built into every program. Computer Explorers is a local education company that uses technology in innovative ways to engage students in science, math, English and other core academic subjects. How to use technology responsibly is embedded in all its after-school programs, recreation center classes, summer camps and even offerings for toddlers.
Many parents worry about the risks of technology access for their children but the key is to teach youngsters how to use it responsibly from the outset. You can't put the genie back in the bottle but you can set some ground rules.
As the 2011-12 academic year starts, many schools will send new "Responsible Use Policies" home with students for parents to review and sign. The policies set rules for computer and Internet use at school and differ for each age group.
Parents get piles of forms to sign at the start of the school year, but the technology policy is a crucial part of their child's schooling. Each year, technology is more and more integrated into education and the earlier children understand how to use it responsibly, the better they'll be prepared for more learning, workplace demands and responsible citizenship.
For these issues, Computer Explorers is a powerful resource. The local company also has an Internet safety program that it can present to PTA groups and community centers at no charge.
At home, parents can reinforce the message with some steps of their own:
-Know what Internet sites your child is visiting. -Set age-appropriate ground rules for home computer use. -Supervise on-line experiences of young children. -Teach your child that saying mean things about others on the Internet, including teasing and name-calling, is not acceptable.
Technology will only become more of a force in schools, homes and jobs. Parents and schools don't have to go it alone and can trust that all of our Computer Explorers programs provide children with not only solid academic learning but clear rules about what is and what is not responsible use of it.
For some children, summer means engineering, science, robotics or computer programming.
And they can't get enough of it.
Computer Explorers summer camps involve video game animation, forensic detective work, "green" engineering, robotics, rocket making, movie production and story writing. Common ingredients include teamwork, collaborative learning, educational relevance and lots of fun.
Children don't want our camps to end.
With such popular offerings, Computer Explorers takes summer camps to a new level, using relevant and engaging material that keeps kids hooked and extends learning in key academic areas. State-of-the-art technology and innovative programs introduce youngsters to concepts that prep them for more advanced learning as well as potential career paths.
Both girls and boys dive right in. We often find that students who were quiet in a traditional classroom setting gain confidence at our camps and return to school with new excitement.
That excitement stays with children who take part in programs with Computer Explorers. We tie all our programs into core academic subjects and continue keeping kids engaged with after school programs at school sites and recreation and community centers during the academic year.
Kids are naturally generous and helpful and by working together, they learn to communicate well and solve problems. In Computer Explorers summer camps, children don't have swimming contests but together they may build a robot that walks and talks or write and direct their own short digital movies.
When most parents think of kids using iPads and iPhones, they think of video games such as Angry Birds. What they may not realize is that these common household devices can be amazing learning tools that help extend the range of learning for young kids.
Computer Explorers, an education technology company that uses cutting-edge devices  to give kids a competitive edge with math, reading and science, believes that the touch screen holds some real advantages for children when it comes to learning.
Younger kids, especially children ages 3-5, learn using their senses. iPads and iPhones reduce barriers to learning and are fun for kids because they can reach out and touch them, which speeds up the learning process.
Having the right apps makes all the difference. Computer Explorers uses these devices as a resource and leverages their strengths so kids learn more of what they are already working on in the classroom.
Here are Computer Explorers' top 7 picks for free apps parents can use over the summer to keep kids learning when school is out:
Counting Coins: Practice with U.S. pennies, nickels, dimes, and quarters, which helps counting and math skills
Alphabet Tracing: Trains, trucks and worms come to life for children to follow, tracing with a finger, while showing the proper way to write alphabet letters and numbers, which is important for fine motor skills and improves handwriting.
ABCheese Lite: Helps preschoolers recognize the alphabet, improve finger tracing, hand-eye coordination and gain logical thinking skills
KinderSpell: Helps preschool children build vocabulary - great for improving sight words
Sight Words by Little Speller: Focuses on 220 common English words and helps young learners recognize them by sound, sight and touch
My Scene: Helps develop visual perception among toddlers ages 2 and up. With parental help, youngsters also can create their own stories, which develops language skills and imagination.
Meegenius!: A library of kids' books, each with read-along technology that uses word highlighting and professional narration to build word recognition
When kids have fun as they learn, they develop a desire to learn more. These are free apps that help give kids confidence and skills so they perform better in the classroom.
Debbie Ricard is an inspiration. An elementary teacher for more than 30 years, she finds using fun props and class characters help keep programs relevant and engaging for the students in her Computertots classes. A valued Computer Explorers teacher in New Castle County, Delaware, she believes that the Computertots program is a great way to get preschoolers interested in technology and she enjoys helping them foster essential learning skills.
Computer Explorers: What is your educational and professional background? Debbie Ricard: I am a retired elementary school teacher. I taught for 32 years in the Delaware public school system and also coordinated a mentor program for the school. I was very active during my time there. I worked on several committees, published the yearbook and stayed very busy.
CE: How long have you been working for Computer Explorers? What brought you to the local franchise? DR: I started working for Computer Explorers in August 2007. I was looking for something a little bit lighter and Computer Explorers seemed like a fun way to keep working with kids. I have always been familiar with technology, which is another thing that brought me to Computer Explorers. As a teacher I was involved in the "Train the Teacher" program, an aspect of the Red Clay Consolidated School District Leadership Cadre. It was formed to assist district classroom teachers with interpreting standardized test data. With my technology background and love of teaching young ones, Computer Explorers seemed like the perfect fit.
CE: What do you teach? What do you like about teaching these programs? DR: I teach Computertots classes to youngsters who are about three years old. I love the small group classes because there is a lot of group contact among the children. I also enjoy the curriculum and am amazed at how much the children retain and can remember throughout the year. It is great to see how it empowers them and helps them build their self-esteem.
CE: Can you describe a typical Computertots class? DR: Our Computertots classes are 30-minute, action-based classes. I start each class by greeting the students with our turtle puppet, CT (Computer Turtle). One student is then asked to reach into the shell and see what surprise CT has for the group that relates to the day's lesson. I find this helps set the stage for learning and promotes interactive discussion.
We always review computer vocabulary before each lesson to make sure the kids understand various parts of the computer. The kids then have time to do hands-on projects and before we wind up the class, they talk about what they liked best and what they learned. They all seem to enjoy it very much.
CE: How tech-savvy are the students you work with? Have you noticed that change over time? DR: Definitely, especially with the little ones. It is really amazing how quickly they are able to get the mouse-cursor coordination down. They really start to understand that what is on the screen is connected with what they are doing with their hands. I see the kids grow considerably from age three to five. Parents will often come to me saying, "You should see what they showed me on the computer; I'm amazed at what they can do!"
CE: How do you keep the parents involved? DR: This year, the Computer Explorers Technology Club enables the parents to experience what their children are learning to do first-hand. It is a learning portal with regular new activities that give parents and their children the opportunity to use the computer together. I also have a weekly email communication system with the parents. I get great feedback from them about how much their children like the class - they really appreciate the personal connection.
CE: People say that these programs help build problem-solving skills among young learners. Can you share an example or two? DR: I definitely think it helps build problem-solving skills. For example, right now we are using an accumulative program where the kids have to find certain things to have a "birthday party." The program encourages kids to remember where things are and requires them to solve various problems to get what they need for the party. They are excited about what they are doing and remember week to week what we are working on. For this particular program we are using a map to see where they have gone and relate it to what they are seeing on the screen. It's a fun way for them to develop problem-solving skills at a young age.
CE: How do CE programs foster collaborative learning? DR: The programs teach the kids how to learn to work together. They are always working as a team, getting to bounce ideas off one another and often celebrating the successes of other children.
CE: What are some memorable moments? DR: We worked with a program called Digital Blue Move Creator that allowed the kids to make their own Goldilocks and The Three Bears movie. The kids learned how to use digital cameras, how to put clips together and how to add special effects. We were able to post it to the website for their families to see the finished product. It was very well received and a fun project for everyone. To view the video you can click on the link and go to the video gallery. http://computerexplorers.com/delaware/computer-explorers-of-new-castle-county .
CE: How important is it that youngsters get this type of training early? DR: As a former first grade teacher, I believe anything that kids can do to make them feel good about themselves while learning new things is great. I think that the Computer Explorers programs serve as great equalizers. Having these programs available for children from lower socioeconomic communities helps expose the youngsters to material they may not otherwise have access to. It is also nice to watch how they grow into "thinking" individuals.