The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers Gentle Ways to Stop Bedtime Battles and Improve Your Child's Sleep
READ WHAT THE PROFESSIONALS SAY
"In this excellent companion to her 2002 parenting classic, The No-Cry Sleep Solution, Pantley debunks many myths about children and sleep. She provides a plethora of examples about how perfectly natural it is for toddlers and preschoolers to have sleep issues. However, parents will be thrilled to hear that just because something is normal doesn't mean they have to live with it. She addresses problems and solutions for a wide variety of sleep-related issues. This is hope condensed for the tired parent; essential for all public libraries."
~ Kari Ramstrom, MLIS, A starred review, The Library Journal, May, 2005
"One frustrating aspect of being a Pediatrician is that it is often hard to give thorough advice for parenting problems in a short office visit. Elizabeth Pantley has once again provided me with a quick and helpful solution - writing a prescription to read The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers ."
~Vincent Iannelli, MD, Pediatrician, President of www.keepkidshealthy.com , author of The Everything Father's First Year Book, and father of twin toddlers
~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
"In her gentle, loving and inspiring way Elizabeth offers hope to parents who have struggled, perhaps for years, with a child who sleeps poorly. The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers is practical and well-researched. It gives effective solutions which can be individualized to suit the often complex causes of sleep problems in young children. Elizabeth has a unique ability to inspire the most exhausted parents, and help them to turn a time of trial into one of special bonding. The techniques she teaches make the process of improving sleep creative, and even fun, for both parents and children." ~Daryl Grant, Ph.D.  Brisbane,  Australia , www.sleep-baby.net/
" The No-Cry Sleep Solution is a welcome alternative to the "cry it out" advice to sleep problems. A crying child is a child in need, and leaving him or her alone to cry to sleep is not responding to the child's need or solving any sleep problems. The No-Cry Sleep Solution makes sense and is a child friendly - and family friendly - approach to sleep problems, something we have been in search of for a long time." ~Jack Newman, MD, FRCPC,  Author of The Ultimate Breastfeeding Book of Answers: The Most Comprehensive Problem-Solution Guide to Breastfeeding from the Foremost Expert in North America
"Real solutions for real people, Elizabeth Pantley has done it again. As a physician and a parent there are no other resources that I recommend as highly or as often as Mrs. Pantley's books on parenting. Finally parents will have the tools necessary to successfully nurture and guide their children (and themselves) sensibly and sanely to a good nights rest." ~Marianne Pinkston M.D., Family Practitioner (and parent of previously sleepless children), San Antonio, TX
"Elizabeth Pantley offers parents a mindful, compassionate, and creative set of tools for a variety of sleep issues. Her welcoming tone is respectful of a diversity of parenting and lifestyle choices - inviting parents to find solutions that work best for their family's specific needs. I would be happy to recommend The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers to sleep-deprived parents everywhere!" ~Nancy Massotto, Ph.D., Executive Director, Holistic Moms Network
"Elizabeth Pantley has created a reference book parents will want at hand through all the changes of the preschool years. The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers will eliminate some sleep problems simply and instantly, with nothing more than a better definition of what is normal. It will also help identify those few sleep problems that may require some medical or other professional attention. Of course, the majority of questions and struggles fall somewhere in between, and for these Pantley offers an extensive collection of gentle and loving tools from which to customized sleep plans that are considerate of the whole family's needs." ~Norma Jane Bumgarner, Author of Mothering Your Nursing Toddler
"Elizabeth Pantley sweeps through the clamor of today's parenting philosophies with commonsense solutions every family can use. The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers provides parents with a virtual roadmap through the maze of sleep issues. Her strategy toolkit includes worksheets, questionnaires, plans and questions designed to give parents the practical tools they need to get the sleep they crave.
In The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers , Elizabeth manages the seemingly impossible: merging exhausted parents' desire for rest with their little ones' driving need for comfort and closeness. This genuinely family-centered approach balances the demands of parents and children alike with respect, flexibility and humor. Elizabeth's inclusive strategies offer alternatives for all sorts of families (married, divorced, single, adoptive ...), all sorts of children (from the easy-going to those with special needs) and all sorts of parenting styles.  You'd be hard-pressed to find a more realistic, practical approach to solving any sleep dilemma." ~Lisa Poisso, Editor-in-Chief, Natural Family Online magazine
"A good night's sleep IS within reach. Let the great ideas in this book guide you and your child there...lovingly." ~Harvey Karp, M.D., Author of The Happiest Toddler on the Block
You are welcome to reprint the article on your website or in your newsletter, provided that you reprint the entire article, including the complete byline with author's name and book title. Please also send a notice or copy to elizabeth@pantley.com . Thank you.
© Better Beginnings Inc. * All Rights Reserved * Reprints by Permission Only *