Children and Sleep
But no one is ever allowed in Sleepytown, unless h e goes to bed in time to take the Sleepytown Express! - James Jackson Montague , The Sleepytown Express
Why Sleep Matters
Sleep is as important to our health and well-being as food and water, but most of us don't get enough of it. Sleep deprivation is currently one of the most pervasive health concerns in the United States. For children, sleep plays a critical role in their healthy growth and development. Beyond simply affecting children's moods, behaviors, and academic performances, insufficient sleep has also been associated with lower social skills and learning disabilities.
How Much Sleep Is Enough?
When experts study the sleep needs of children, they consider the amount of sleep children need in a 24-hour period, including naps. Since every child is different, sleep charts are not exact; however, there are some agreed-upon ranges for children of different ages*:
Birth to 6 months old : 10 to 18 hours of sleep each day
Six months to 2 years old : 11 to 16 hours of sleep each day
Three years old : 10 to 14 hours of sleep each day
Four to 6 years old : 9 to 14 hours of sleep each day
Seven to 9 years old : 9 to 12 hours of sleep each day
Ten to 12 years old : 8 to 11 hours of sleep each day
(*from Iglowstein I., Jenni, O. G., Molinari, L., & Largo, R. H. (2003). Sleep duration from infancy to adolescence: Reference values and generational trends. Pediatrics, 111 (2), 302-307.)
Do these numbers surprise you? If so, you are not alone. Most parents are unaware of just how much sleep their children require in a 24-hour period.
Teaching Children Good Sleep Habits
Sleep habits-both positive and negative-are established early in a child's life, often in infancy. The key, of course, is to help your child establish good sleep habits early. Here are some suggestions.
Establish a schedule of the day's main events, such as the same waking time, nap time, and meal times. Regular routines offer babies and young children comfort and security.
Vary your child's daytime activities, making sure they are interesting and varied. Be sure to include physical activities and outdoor activities as much as possible.
Determine a simple bedtime routine that is well suited to your child, such as reading a book or talking for a few minutes about the day's events.
Give some time to determining your child's ideal bedtime. For example, observe her over several evenings and note when she begins to slow down and act physically tired. That is the time she should be going to sleep , so plan to begin her bedtime routine prior to that time.
Make bedtime a special time. It should be a time to interact with your child in a way that is secure and loving, yet firm. Go through your bedtime routine together, then it's lights out and time to go to sleep.
If you suspect your child is sleep-deprived but are having difficulty establishing new sleep habits and routines, it's time to take action. You may find the following references helpful:
Garfield Star Sleeper-a website for children, hosted by the National Center on Sleep Disorder Research (NCSDR)
Nighttime Parenting: How to Get Your Baby and Child to Sleep by William Sears
Healthy Sleep Habits, Happy Child by Marc Weissbluth
Take Charge of Your Child's Sleep: The All-in-One Resource for Solving Sleep Problems in Kids and Teens by Judy A. Owens and Jodi A. Mindell