Dealing with legal issues in homeschooling.
There are a number of legal issues that must be considered when you're beginning your homeschool. Each state has their own rules and laws governing how you run your homeschool. In addition to that, many districts have oversight of the homeschoolers in their area. It can sometimes be overwhelming for new homeschoolers to know what they can and cannot do in their homeschool.
When I began homeschooling my oldest daughter I was a little bit concerned because of the horror stories. I had heard of social service workers appearing on doorsteps and family members trying to close a homeschool. I had also heard horror stories of awful homeschooling parents. I wanted to run a perfect homeschool so no one would ever question my homeschooling.
For me, the best way to learn what was required of me and my homeschool was to use HLA . They have a wonderful tool that will list, by state, what homeschoolers are required to do and required to report. You also know that if you are ever contacted by a truancy officer or social services worker on a homeschooling matter you can call HLA and they will offer legal advice, and representation, if necessary.
When we were adopting our daughter three years ago we called them as well to find out what documentation, if any, we would need and if the laws were different for our adopted daughter.
Homeschooling is a very time consuming task in and of itself.  Having a professional you can call on about such important issues as the legality of your homeschool help this homeschooler sleep better at night.  And no matter if you read up on the legal issues yourself, or use an outside group like HLA, make sure that you are keeping accurate, up-to-date records of what you are teaching and how your child is progressing in your homeschool. That way if you're homeschooling is ever questioned you have the documentation necessary to prove that you are teaching your child.
See our additional resources below. We update them regularly, so add yours by contacting us. Homeschool Legal Advantage   is a nonprofit advocacy organization established to defend and advance the constitutional right of parents to direct the education of their children and to protect family freedoms. Home Educators Legal Protection Services (H.E.L.P.S.) is designed to fill the need in America to legally protect those who desire to homeschool their children. The rights for parents to educate their children at home are constantly being attacked. They enable you to reach an experienced homeschool attorney with only a phone call. Economic Thinking's mission is to inspire students to explore the dynamics of a market economy through understanding the central role of economic freedom, property rights, and the rule of law in promoting progress and prosperity in America and around the world. To connect intellectually hungry speech and debate students with the already well-established world of free-market scholarship. High school and homeschool students deserve an opportunity to learn how free societies work and why they are just.
Homeschool Families love our extensive Christian Curriculum Information Directory, and Resource overviews for Christian Homeschool Educators.
SIGN UP NOW to receive our monthly newsletter! Our subscribers receive incredible DISCOUNT offers as well as news and encouragement that is specifically for Homeschoolers.
Email Name Then We never rent, share or sell your information, and you can subscribe at any time.
Help other Homeschoolers while your help yourself! PLEASE SUBMIT YOUR FAMILY FRIENDLY SUPPORT GROUPS