E-vent Library
HSLDA's @home e-vent library is a collection of the recordings of all past live e-vents. We post recordings online a few business days after an e-vent goes live to allow you to listen to any previous e-vent at your convenience. To purchase a recording, simply click "Add To Cart" and proceed to the "Shopping Cart." Access your recording under the "Purchase History" tab and watch as many times as you like for a period of 30 days! You will be able to pause, rewind, and fast-forward at your convenience.
If you're a home educator in Alabama, you won't want to miss this informative webinar! HSLDA attorney Dewitt Black will explain what you need to do to start a successful home instruction program. Dee will clarify what information must be maintained and reported to public school officials and will address particular trouble spots in the heart of Dixie. Throughout the session, you will have the opportunity to ask Dee questions specific to homeschooling in Alabama. This is a free, members-only webinar.
Are you a home educator in Massachusetts? Then you'll want to join HSLDA attorney Mike Donnellyin his helpful webinar, "How to Homeschool in Massachusetts"!
Donnelly will address questions such as: How do we get "approval" for our homeschool? What paperwork must I provide to the superintendent? How do I deal with social workers? What if officials ask for more information than they are entitled to? Don't miss this members-only e-vent! Pull up a chair to your computer-and bring your specific Massachusetts homeschool questions for Donnelly's Q&A session.
Are you a homeschooling parent in North Carolina? If so, then you won't want to miss this informative @home e-vent with HSLDA Senior Counsel Dewitt Black. New home educators and seasoned veterans alike will benefit from this overview of home instruction in North Carolina. Join Dee as he explains the legal requirements for establishing a home study program and covers matters relating to curriculum and general instruction. In addition, he'll also discuss the typical legal problems you may encounter when homeschooling. Bring your questions and register today! This is a free e-vent open to HSLDA members only.
In this informative webinar, HSLDA attorney Scott Woodruff addresses the needs and questions of homeschooling families in the state of Iowa. Learn how to successfully navigate state-specific policies and statutes that can affect home educators. Scott clarifies specific considerations for homeschoolers and takes time to answer your particular questions regarding home education in Iowa in a Q&A session.
HSLDA's attorney for New York State, Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt, offers helpful information and advice to parent's homeschooling their children in the Empire State. In this webinar, Tj will focus on the quarterly reports and how to prepare for the year end annual assessments. If you have questions about what you need to include in the quarterly reports or whether you have to use a standardized test or use the alternative written narrative evaluation this is the webinar for you.
Join HSLDA Attorney for Member Affairs for the Buckeye State as he presents the information you need to comply with the law and to be prepared to defend your family in the event of unwelcome interactions with public authorities. Mike will review Ohio's home school regulations and review private education under Ohio's -08 regulation. Wayne Clark, CHEO's Acting Chairman and Melanie Elsey, CHEO's legislative Liaison will join Mike in a discussion about laws, legislation and issues Ohio Homeschoolers should know about. Don't miss this free members-only event - you will have the opportunity to interact with Mike, Wayne or Melanie live and to ask questions and get answers. Sign up today - Space is limited!
If you're a home educator in Tennessee, you won't want to miss this informative webinar! HSLDA attorney Dewitt Black will explain what you need to do to start a successful home instruction program. Dee will clarify what information must be maintained and reported to public school officials, and will address particular trouble spots in your home state. Throughout the session, you will have the opportunity to ask Dee questions specific to homeschooling in Tennessee.
In this informative webinar, HSLDA attorney Scott Woodruff addresses the needs and questions of homeschooling families in the state of Virginia. Learn how to successfully navigate state-specific policies and statutes that can affect home educators. Scott clarifies specific considerations for homeschoolers and takes time to answer your particular questions regarding home education in Virginia in a Q&A session.
HSLDA's contact attorney for Washington State, Thomas J.(Tj) Schmidt, offers helpful information, advice, and guidelines to parents seeking to homeschool their children in the Evergreen State. Tj will discuss part-time participation in the public school and how you can know that you are still in control of your child's education if you choose to participate in these programs. Tj will also address what is required in the Declaration of Intent, where to submit the form, what a parent must do for the annual assessment, and what legal requirements parents must fulfill when teaching their children at home. In this webinar, you'll learn all you need to be informed and equipped for your Washington State-style home-based education program.
If you're a home educator in Arkansas, you won't want to miss this informative webinar! HSLDA attorney Dewitt Black will explain what you need to do to start a successful home instruction program. Dee will clarify what information must be maintained and reported to public school officials, and will address particular trouble spots in your home state. Throughout the session, you will have the opportunity to ask Dee questions specific to homeschooling in Arkansas.
Attention, all HSLDA members in West Virginia-we have a members-only e-vent just for you! Join HSLDA attorney Mike Donnelly for an informative webinar focusing on homeschooling in your state. During the e-vent, Mike will share helpful information that you need to know in order to set up your home education program and will answer your specific questions. Don't miss this chance to gain legal insights and ask your questions regarding homeschooling in the Mountain State!
In this informative webinar, HSLDA attorney Scott Woodruff addresses the needs and questions of homeschooling families in the state of Kansas. Don't be intimidated by homeschool legal issues- learn how to successfully navigate relevant state-specific policies and statutes so that you can be confident in your home education! Scott clarifies specific considerations for homeschoolers and takes time to answer your particular questions regarding home education in Kansas in a Q&A session.
Is it legal for your children to assist you in your family business? Does your young teen want to start earning money for college, a mission trip, or a car? If so, don't miss this exclusive @home e-vent with HSLDA Of Counsel for California Mary E. Schofield. Mary will be detailing the positive changes recently made to the Golden State's work permits and how they apply to homeschoolers. Having played an integral role in the production and implementation of this legal change, she will be sharing the history of the work permit, the story behind the recent changes, the current law, and more! Be sure to bring your questions for the Q&A session at the end of this presentation.
Attention Oregon members: In this informative webinar, HSLDA attorney Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt will explain the requirements for homeschooling in accordance with state law and provide key details for the notice of intent to the local education service district (ESD), record-keeping, and the various legal options for evaluating your child's progress. Tj will also discuss hot topics in the state, such as virtual public school programs and access to public school activities and services, along with the impact of involvement on parents' control of their child's education. Be sure to bring your specific questions have regarding homeschooling in Oregon for Tj to address.
If you are an HSLDA member in the state of Utah-we have a members-only e-vent just for you! Join HSLDA attorney Mike Donnelly for an informative webinar all about homeschooling in your state. In this e-vent, Mike will share helpful information to help you set up your home education program and answer any specific questions you may have. Don't miss this chance to get legal insight and information-bring your questions regarding homeschooling in Utah!
In this informative webinar, HSLDA attorney Scott Woodruff addresses the needs and questions of homeschooling families in the state of Maine. Learn how to successfully navigate state-specific policies and statutes that can affect home educators. Scott clarifies specific considerations for homeschoolers and takes time to answer your particular questions regarding home education in Maine in a Q&A session.
On May 6, Governor Kaine signed a bill expanding the Virginia Guaranteed Assistance Program to give homeschoolers access to college scholarship money. Do you know how this program will impact your high schooler's college scholarship opportunities? HSLDA Attorney Scott Woodruff joins Lee Andes of the State Council for Higher Education in Virginia to help you discover the answers to important questions such as: Who is eligible? What are the state's standards? How much funding is available? How can you apply? Get the full story on Senate Bill 1547 as Scott and Lee answer your questions in this free HSLDA @home e-vent.
Join Mike Farris and Representative Pete Hoekstra(MI), the sponsor of H.J. Res 42, for a briefing on the resolution and the effort to pass the Parental Rights Amendment. A time for questions and answers will follow.
On July 7th, 2009, the Marshall County Tribune-Courier reported that the Director of Pupil Personnel (DPP) for Marshall County Public Schools intended to do random home visits of all of the homeschool programs in the county over the next few months. HSLDA has written to Ms. Williamson and explained that this would be contrary to the Best Practices Document and potentially in violation of a family's privacy rights. Staff Attorney Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt will host a discussion of this situation and provide general information to members on what to do in the event Ms. Williamson's stated plan goes forward. There will be time for questions.
What are my options for homeschooling in California? Is one option safer than the other? Does HSLDA recommend one over the other? Join HSLDA President, Mike Smith for this FREE e-vent to discuss the nuts and bolts of homeschooling in California. He'll also address questions about the ongoing impact of the Jonathan Long case and provide helpful tips for responding to a surprise visit by a school official. While it's natural to feel apprehensive about contact from the public school, being prepared with the right tools can enable you to answer any knock at your door with confidence. Know your rights and how to respond. And bring your questions! The session will conclude with an open Q&A session.
Are you a homeschooling parent or teacher in Pennsylvania? Whether you're new to home education or a seasoned veteran-this @home e-vent will address all your questions! Come join HSLDA's Attorney Dewitt Black as he explains the options available to parents for conducting home education in Pennsylvania and covers the legal problems most often encountered between families and public school officials. He will also discuss the current legislative proposal to change the state's homeschool law, which would require superintendents to accept the findings of the evaluator chosen by the parent and prevent the superintendent from conducting another independent review of the portfolio. Bring your questions and register today! This is a free e-vent open to HSLDA members only.
Are you wondering what you need to do to comply with Minnesota homeschool law? Are you interested in the latest legislative battles that took place at the capitol? Are you concerned about standardized testing?
Join HSLDA Attorney Michael P. Donnelly and MACHE Board Member John Tuma for an informative @home e-vent. Log on from the comfort of your own home and listen to Mike and John explain the current state of homeschooling in Minnesota. They will also discuss the recent legislative session and take some time to answer any questions or concerns you may have. Bring your specific questions for the Q&A session!
Did you know that New Hampshire's compulsory attendance law change has gone into effect? What does this mean for you and your family as homeschoolers? Do you have questions? Will you have to keep reporting to your participating agency? Are you wondering what options are available to you and your 16-year-old who would have been "free" from compulsory attendance requirements prior to this change? How is the New Hampshire legislature using House Bill 368 to study state homeschool law? Come listen to HSLDA Attorney Mike Donnelly and Christian Home Educators of New Hampshire President Jim Parison talk about homeschooling in the Granite State during these uncertain times. A Q&A session will follow. This is a member only e-vent.
If you aren't a member of HSLDA, join today so you can participate in this valuable FREE e-vent sponsored by HSLDA's @home e-vents!
HSLDA's attorney for New York State, Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt, offers helpful information, advice, and guidelines to parents seeking to homeschool their children in the Empire State. In this straight-shooting webinar, he will address how to submit formal documents to uphold the state's educational regulations, which subjects must be covered in each grade level, and how to navigate annual assessments and standardized tests. You'll learn all you need to be informed and equipped for your New York-style home education.
If you live in Colorado and homeschool or are involved in an independent school, you won't want to miss this informative e-vent! Join HSLDA Staff Attorney Mike Donnelly to untangle the ins and outs of educating your children at home in the Centennial State. Prepare to engage in the discussion, as Mike will leave time to take your specific questions during a Q&A session. This is a members-only e-vent.
In this informative webinar, HSLDA attorney Thomas J. Schmidt addresses the needs and questions of homeschooling families in the state of Kentucky. Learn how to successfully navigate policies and regulations regarding compulsory attendance age, notice of intent, scholarship reports, and attendance records. This webinar also touches on declaration of participation forms and documents necessary for student driver's licenses. Tj clarifies specific considerations for homeschoolers and takes the time to answer your questions regarding home education in Kentucky in a Q&A session.
Home educators in Georgia won't want to miss this informative webinar! HSLDA attorney Dewitt Black will explain what you need to do to get started with your home study program. Dee will clarify what information must be maintained and reported to public school officials, and will address particular trouble spots in the Peach State. Throughout the session, you will have the opportunity to ask Dee questions specific to homeschooling in Georgia.
Can home educated students stop counting their 1000 credit hours at age 14? 15? 16? 17?
Under a new Missouri law, compulsory attendance goes to age 17 unless a child has earned 16 high school credits. Scott Woodruff will explain what a "credit" really is for homeschoolers and how they can earn one. Learn ways to adapt your record-keeping and college preparation to this new development. Don't get behind the curve on this important change in the law!
Woodruff will allow time to take your specific questions regarding this law change. Time permitting, Woodruff will also walk through other aspects of homeschool law for those who are relatively new to homeschooling in Missouri. (This is a members-only e-vent.)
In this informative webinar, HSLDA attorney Scott Woodruff addresses the needs and questions of homeschooling families in the state of New Jersey. Don't be intimidated by homeschool legal issues- learn how to successfully navigate relevant state-specific policies and statutes so that you can be confident in your home education! Scott clarifies specific considerations for homeschoolers and takes time to answer your particular questions regarding home education in New Jersey in a Q&A session.
If you're a home educator in North Dakota, you won't want to miss this informative webinar! HSLDA attorney Dewitt Black will explain what you need to do to start a successful home instruction program. Dee will clarify what information must be maintained and reported to public school officials, and will address particular trouble spots in your home state. Throughout the session, you will have the opportunity to ask Dee questions specific to homeschooling in North Dakota.
If you're a homeschooling family in Nebraska, you won't want to miss this free, informative e-vent just for you! HSLDA attorney Mike Donnelly will help untangle the ins and outs of educating your children at home in Nebraska. Prepare to participate, as Mike will take your specific questions about homeschooling in the Cornhusker State during the Q&A portion of this e-vent!
If you're a homeschooling parent in Mississippi, you won't want to miss this informative e-vent tailored specifically to your needs! HSLDA attorney Dewitt Black will explain the up-to-date legal requirements for homeschooling in your state and clarify what information must be maintained and reported to public school officials. In addition, he will address particular trouble spots in Mississippi. Throughout the session, you will have the opportunity to ask Dee questions specific to homeschooling in the Magnolia State.
Home educators in South Carolina won't want to miss this informative e-vent! HSLDA Senior Counsel Dewitt (Dee) Black will explain what you need to do to get started with your home study program. Dee will clarify what information must be maintained and reported to public school officials, and will address particular trouble spots in the Palmetto State. Throughout the session, you will have the opportunity to ask Dee questions specific to homeschooling in South Carolina.
In this informative webinar, HSLDA Senior Counsel Scott Woodruff addresses the needs and questions of homeschooling families in the state of Illinois. Don't be intimidated by legal issues-learn how to successfully navigate relevant state policies and statutes so that you can be confident in your home education program! Scott clarifies specific considerations for homeschoolers and takes time to answer your particular questions regarding home education in the Prairie State.
HSLDA's attorney for New York State, Thomas J. Schmidt, offers helpful information, advice, and guidelines to parents seeking to homeschool their children in the Empire State. In this straight-shooting webinar, he will address how to submit formal documents to uphold the state's educational regulations, which subjects must be covered in each grade level, and how to navigate annual assessments and standardized tests. You'll learn all you need to be informed and equipped for your New York-style home education.
Attention, all HSLDA members in Vermont-we have a members-only e-vent just for you! Join HSLDA attorney Mike Donnelly for an informative webinar focusing on homeschooling in your state. During the e-vent, Mike will share helpful information that you need to know in order to set up your home education program and will answer your specific questions. Don't miss this chance to gain legal insights and ask your questions regarding homeschooling in the Green Mountain State!
Are you a homeschooling parent or teacher in Connecticut? Whether you're new to home education or a seasoned veteran-this @home e-vent will address all your questions! Come join HSLDA Senior Counsel Dewitt (Dee) Black as he explains the options available to parents for conducting home education in The Constitution State. He will also discuss the legal problems most often encountered between families and public school officials and show you how to avoid them. Bring your questions and register today!
HSLDA's attorney for Oklahoma, Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt, offers helpful information, advice, and guidelines to parents seeking to homeschool their children in the Sooner State. In this straight-shooting webinar, Tj will address what you need to know about the unique protection Oklahoma provides under the state constitution to parents "providing other means of education" to their children. In this @home e-vent you'll learn all you need to be informed and equipped for your home education program in Oklahoma.
Don't be intimidated by homeschool legal issues-learn how to successfully navigate Rhode Island's policies and statutes so that you can be confident in your home education! In this exclusive @home e-vent, HSLDA Staff Attorney Scott Woodruff addresses the needs and questions of Rhode Island homeschooling families and clarifies specific considerations and regulations that you need to be aware of. Bring your questions and find the answers in this e-vent about home education in the Ocean State.
Whether you're new to home education or a seasoned veteran, this free members-only @home e-vent will address all your questions about homeschooling in the Cowboy State! HSLDA Staff Attorney Mike Donnelly will help untangle the ins and outs of educating your children at home in Wyoming. With careful explanation of state requirements and regulations, as well as answers to your specific questions, this is a member benefit that will provide clarity and peace of mind for homeschooling parents. Register today!
You may be facing the prospect of homeschooling for the first time, or you may have taught your children at home for years. Either way, if you are a homeschooling parent in Montana, HSLDA Senior Counsel Dewitt (Dee) Black has advice to share with you. Dee will give an overview of Montana state law as it pertains to homeschooling, explain the requirements to establish your homeschool legally, and answer your questions. He'll address common legal issues and how best to handle them. Make sure you sign up for this HSLDA members-only e-vent, and don't forget to bring your questions about homeschooling in the Treasure State!
American homeschoolers enjoy a freedom that many around the world only dream about. If you'd like to know what homeschoolers in other parts of the world are facing, or if you've ever wondered whether your support could impact international homeschoolers, keep reading! HSLDA is excited to present its first-ever international e-vent as a resource for you.
Join Mike Donnelly, HSLDA's Director of International Relations, as he chats with an impressive array of international homeschool leaders. His panel will include Dave Tucker from El Hogar Educador in Mexico; Gabriel Curcubet, president of the Romanian Home Schooling Association; Leendert van Oostrum, president of the Pestalozzi Trust Legal Defence Fund in South Africa; and Uwe Romeike, a German homeschool father whose family is fighting for political asylum in the United States.
Don't miss this unique opportunity to hear from homeschool leaders across the globe!
Don't leave your Arizona homeschooling questions unanswered! In this @home e-vent provided as a benefit to HSLDA members, Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt (HSLDA staff attorney for Arizona) offers helpful information and advice to parents homeschooling their children in the Grand Canyon State. Tj will cover everything from submitting your affidavit to what type of records you should keep and for how long. You will also have the opportunity to ask additional questions during the e-vent. Get the peace of mind and advice you need-sign up for this e-vent today.
In the wake of the November 2010 elections, the landscape of New Hampshire's state legislature is looking significantly brighter for homeschoolers. Republican legislators, who were the minority, now outnumber Democrats by a margin of almost three to one in the House and nearly four to one in the Senate. Specifically noteworthy for homeschoolers were the elections of homeschool father and former Christian Home Educators of New Hampshire President Jim Parison and strong homeschool advocate Jim Forsythe.
This exciting swing of control has many in the "Live free or die" state wondering what will happen in the 2011-12 legislative session. HSLDA is keenly aware of the favorable numbers and has undertaken discussion with key legislators about what should be done. Join HSLDA Staff Attorney Michael Donnelly and several invited guests for this exclusive legislative panel discussion!
Your homeschooling freedom is in danger! What can you do about it? Join HSLDA Staff Attorney Scott Woodruff for an urgent, open-to-the-public webinar on Senator Edward Maloney's proposed Illinois bill SB 136. Learn why this bill would threaten all private school and homeschooling families with unprecedented state regulation. Invite your friends, family, homeschool groups, and private school acquaintances to watch this webinar so we can work together to protect your freedom in Illinois!
Homeschooling is hard work-and it can be even harder if you don't understand the homeschool laws in your state! If you need guidance for complying with the legal requirements for homeschooling in the Aloha State, HSLDA Staff Attorney Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt is here to help. In this relaxed webinar, Tj will address how to submit the required notice to satisfy the Hawaii Administrative Rules, what subjects should be covered, how to navigate annual progress reports, when standardized tests are required, and any record-keeping requirements. You'll be fully equipped for your Hawaii-style home education program!
If you live in the First State, you have several options as a homeschooler! Whether you're feeling overwhelmed by Delaware homeschool law or just want some clarity, join HSLDA Senior Counsel Dewitt (Dee) Black as he explains just what the law requires of homeschool parents. Dee will discuss how to prevent legal complications and will cover the legal issues that Delaware homeschoolers face most frequently. Find the homeschooling option that works best for you in Delaware!
Home education in the Great Lakes State may present its own special challenges, since every state's law is different. In this e-vent, come find out what you should know about homeschooling in Michigan! HSLDA Senior Counsel Dewitt (Dee) Black will explain the state laws regarding homeschooling, and help you know how to apply them to your home education program. Whether you live in Michigan or will be moving there soon-join us to find out how you can teach your children with confidence!
HSLDA's attorney for New Mexico, Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt, offers helpful information, advice, and guidelines to parents seeking to homeschool their children in the Land of Enchantment. In this straightforward e-vent, he will address how to submit formal documents for beginning your homeschool program, which subjects must be covered, and what record keeping is required. Tj will also discuss teacher qualifications and college admissions. Join us for this e-vent, and you'll learn all you need to be informed and equipped for your New Mexico-style home education program!
If you live in the state of Missouri and your student is looking for a job, chances are you will need to obtain a work certificate. In this @home e-vent, HSLDA Senior Counsel Scott Woodruff will let you know exactly how parents can issue the certificate themselves-without having talking to any public school officials! You will learn what hours, days, and types of jobs your student can work under Missouri law, as well as whether a work certificate is necessary for a summer job. Missouri is a pioneer in allowing parents to issue work certificates. Attend this e-vent, get informed, and enjoy your new freedom!
In this informative webinar, HSLDA attorney Thomas J. (Tj) Schmidt addresses homeschooling in the state of Florida. He explain the various options for homeschooling in accordance with state law and gives advice for successfully navigating the requirements of compulsory school attendance, notice of intent submission and umbrella school enrollment, record-keeping, and evaluations. Tj will also address virtual public school programs and the questions that we often receive from parents who want to remain in control of their private home education program. With clarity and passion, Tj outlines specific considerations for homeschoolers, and answers the questions you may have regarding home education in Florida.
With controversy brewing over what information the state can demand from homeschoolers, you probably have questions about what parents are truly required to do in order to comply with Wisconsin homeschool law. Join HSLDA Senior Counsel Scott Woodruff as he outlines what you need to know to homeschool legally in Wisconsin. He will thoroughly explain the annual enrollment form the Department of Public Instruction wants homeschoolers to fill out-and where the department has gone astray in its demands.
Find out about the changes to Tennessee's homeschool law that go into effect on July 1 of this year. These changes are hot off the press, as Tennessee's governor just signed into law the significant improvements made by the legislature during its 2011 session. HSLDA Senior Counsel Dee Black will discuss all of the changes and answer any questions you have about the new law.
@home e-vents is a resource created by the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) , a nonprofit advocacy organization established to defend and advance the constitutional right of parents to direct the education of their children and to protect family freedoms. Our HSLDA members always receive a discount on @home e-vents. If you aren't a member of HSLDA, what are you waiting for? Join today!
We welcome your questions, feedback, and suggestions. Contact us at: Athome@hslda.org or (540) 338-8287.
National Organizations
Quick Navigation
STAY CONNECTED
Copyright © 2011 HSLDA. All Rights Reserved. P.O. Box 3000 • Purcellville, VA 20134-9000 • Phone: 540-338-5600 • Fax: 540-338-2733 • Email: Click here Privacy Policy      |      User Agreement