Christian Home Educators of Kentucky is a Christian-based statewide organization that provides resources, legal forms, support groups, and holds local activities to connect homeschooling families in Kentucky. The webpage contains additional resources including booklists and a monthly newsletter.
Homeschooling in Kentucky is a collection of links to several articles on external websites pertaining to the topics of beginning homeschooling, legal issues, curriculum, teaching methods, and suppliers of homeschooling products. This is an excellent resource for finding worksheets and other free teaching aids.
Kentucky Department of Education provides links to the state requirements for homeschooling, legalities of credits for homeschooling, and a page for frequently asked questions. There is also a link to the homeschool information packet provided by the Kentucky Home Education Association and the Christian Home Educators of Kentucky as well as sample worksheets for record keeping and a reading list.
Kentucky Home Education Association has a detailed information packet that can be downloaded as a PDF file. The packet contains an overview of the content found throughout the site which includes legal issues, curriculum resources, sports issues, and a list of homeschool groups in the area.
Kentucky Homeschooling Information is run by a homeschooling parent in Kentucky. There are many helpful links to curriculum resources for reading, spelling, math, and prepared units created by other homeschooling parents. The site also lists field trip opportunities in Kentucky. It encourages registration for its fee-based membership; however, the links on the main page are free to access.
National Organizations
Homeschool Foundation is the charitable arm of the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) and is dedicated to bringing hope and tangible help to homeschoolers in need by providing assistance and related expenses to homeschooling families.
Home School Legal Defense Association is a nonprofit association that advocates for and defends the rights of parents who have decided to homeschool their children. They fight for the constitutional rights of these parents by representing them on statewide or national levels when there are conflicts involved in the choice of educating their children. Their mission centers on parental rights and religious freedoms. The site links to many important legal matters regarding homeschool choice and is a well organized asset to home educators.
National Association for Child Development designs very specific home educational and therapeutic programs for infants, children, and adults given the labels including; Learning Disabled, Dyslexic, Distractible, ADD, ADHD, Hyperactive, Down Syndrome, Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, Williams Syndrome, Tourettes Syndrome, Rhetts Syndrome, Fragile X, Developmentally Delayed, PDD, Autistic, Cerebral Palsy, Brain Injured, Comatose, Retarded, Minimal Brain Dysfunction, Normal, Accelerated, and Gifted.
National Home Education Research Institute is a portal for homeschooling families to access research, fact-based information regarding topics of homeschooling. Some items located on the website are free to view or print, but most information is provided at a cost to the homeschool inquirer. There are research papers, audiocassettes, videos/DVD's, factsheets, and books among others available to the consumer. The database can be utilized to search topics, but accessing the articles requires a subscription. Under the link NHERI Research there are some items available for free.
General Sites
A to Z Home's Cool is a homeschooling parent's one-stop shop for loads of online information including lesson plans, curriculum planning, books for purchase, and helpful articles regarding various home education topics.
Eclectic Homeschool Online is a great online resource for the beginner homeschooler and family. It contains thousands of pages of free resources and answers to generalities such as why to homeschool.
Home Education Magazine is the online magazine version that is available in some branch libraries for check-out. Read the current issue with a subscription, peruse back issues of the magazine, or purchase bundles of back issues at low cost. There is a homeschooling blog with ongoing posts as well.
Homeschool Central has a "New Homeschoolers" link that is helpful for beginners. It also links to state resources that are critical to the homeschooler's particular area. It contains a very detailed list of links to many topics and subject areas.
Homeschool.com is a great blend for those considering homeschooling and those who are seasoned with advanced homeschoolers. It contains FAQs, free newsletters, community message boards, and hundreds of articles to browse.
Homeschool Fun provides a listing of over 900 homeschool lessons and activities. Whatever you might be looking for to challenge your homeschooler, this site has many to choose from that are outlined and ready to go.
Homeschool World is the official website of Practical Homeschooling Magazine. It has a very nice collection of free articles and testimonials, a shop to purchase materials, links to current homeschool events around the country, and community forums to exchange ideas.
Bookstores and Bargains for Homeschoolers
The Back Pack is an online store to purchase materials that are of interest to homeschoolers. It contains among others, Abeka and BJU, used textbooks, curriculum, and children's books.
Beginning Reading Worksheets offers free worksheets to print, including alphabet recognition, short/long vowel sounds, flashcards, counting, coloring pages, and more.
Learning Page.com requires registration to receive benefits. Becoming a member allows free access to downloadable basic worksheets, theme worksheets, books, and clipart. Also included is additional resources for free online teaching supplements.
School Express has an online store in which you can download thematic units and eworkbooks. A membership is also required which allows access to 16,000 free worksheets.
Kentucky Area Support Groups
Bluegrass Homeschool Learning Cooperative is a secular group that offers educational opportunities and experiences for members. Non-members can join the Yahoo! group for support, discussions, news, and field trip information.
Bullitt County Homeschool is an all-inclusive group for educational and emotional support. Play groups with educational and social activities are also offered.
Cadette Girl Scouts of Southern Indiana and Kentucky has bi-monthly meetings (September-May) scheduled and coordinated alongside their homeschool troops of Daisy/Brownies and Juniors. Parent involvement is required. Children of various ages and both genders are welcome.
Christian Home-Educators of the Bluegrass is an incorporated group located in Lexington, Kentucky. A membership fee and a commitment to volunteer are required to join. Members are accepted on a first-come, first-serve basis.
Hands On Homeschooling Loop offers links to educational, homeschooling, and informational websites as well as printable worksheets and activities. Membership is required to obtain information.
Home Educators - Louisville is a secular list for all home educators and those considering homeschooling that live within the Louisville Metro area. Use this site to find out about field trips available in the Louisville area and discuss homeschooling issues.
Home For His Glory is a list for Christian homeschoolers in the Louisville, Kentucky and Southern Indiana areas. Members are encouraged to share homeschool ideas, questions, field trips, prayer requests, and discuss homeschooling issues.
H.O.P.E. Homeschool Parents Educate serves Martin, Lawrence, and surrounding counties in Eastern Kentucky. This group offers friendship, support, information, field trips, play dates, 4H, and more. Membership is free.
League of Observant Jewish Homeschoolers is no longer active but has made the homeschooling information they collected over the past few years available for families interested in Orthodox Jewish Homeschooling.
Oldham Christian Home Educators is a Christian homeschool community based in Oldham County, Kentucky. This site was formed to facilitate communication, maintain relationships within the group, offer encouragement, and promote the group's activities in the county and surrounding rural areas.
Shelby County Home Educators of KY i s for multi-denominational Christian homeschoolers in Shelby County, Kentucky and surrounding areas. Find local gym days, field trips, playgroups, co-op opportunities, homeschool ideas, questions, prayer requests, and discuss issues related to homeschooling families.
Spencer County Home Educators of Kentucky is a Yahoo! group that serves Spencer County and the surrounding areas to promote discussion, fellowship, and sharing of information about fieldtrips, events, and resources.
Valley View Home Educators is geared toward families that belong to the Valley View Church in an effort to share homeschooling ideas, knowledge, and resources.