Homeschooling Lawyers
The Legal Information Provided in this Web site is for General Reference Only and Should Not be Relied Upon — You Should Always Consult a Lawyer to Determine Your Legal Rights.
This site only provides general information about the law which is designed only to help users of the site learn more about their own legal needs. But general legal information is not the same as legal advice — true legal advice is the application of local and federal law to an individual's specific circumstances, and true legal advice can only be given by a lawyer.
This Web site is not operated by a law firm, and the content provided by this site should not be used as a substitute for legal advice from a qualified lawyer. Although we go to great lengths to make sure our information is accurate and useful, the laws vary considerably in different jurisdictions (from State to State and from County to County) and laws change frequently. As a result, you should never rely on the accuracy or applicability of the information provided by this Web site because there is no substitute for true legal advice from a lawyer. We strongly recommend you consult a lawyer to discuss the laws in your area and how they apply to your particular situation.
What is Homeschooling?
Homeschooling refers to a situation where a parent or guardian educates a school-aged child through a home study program. Programs vary, but include the basic academic subjects taught in schools such as reading, math, and science.
Is Homeschooling Legal?
Yes, homeschooling is legal. However, the laws differ depending on your state and school district. State law commonly requires that the parent or guardian doing the homeschooling have a high school diploma. Beyond that, state homeschooling laws fall into one of the following categories:
No notice required: a parent or guardian may choose to homeschool a child without providing any notification to the state
Low regulation: a parent or guardian is simply required to notify proper authorities of homeschooling
Moderate regulation: a parent or guardian must send notification, plus test scores or other professional assessments of the child's progress
High regulation: a parent or guardian must send notification, test scores or professional assessments and also may be required to obtain state approval of the curriculum, teacher qualification, or meetings with state officials
How Can I Begin Homeschooling?
If you are interested in homeschooling, you should get more information on your state¿s laws. Helpful references include homeschooling organizations, homeschooling support groups, and your local library.
Should I Talk to a Lawyer about Homeschooling Issues?
The information surrounding homeschooling can be plentiful and accessible. However, much of this information requires interpretation. An experienced education attorney can help clarify the laws and regulations of homeschooling in your region.
The Utah State Bar presents this web site as a service to our members and to the public. Information presented in this site is NOT legal advice. Please review the Terms of Use for more policy, disclaimer &amp; liability information - Utah State Bar email: webmaster@utahbar.org