Over at the Pioneer Woman , Heather Sanders shares a wonderful idea for a support group meeting:
Work and Homeschool
Lots of homeschool moms homeschool and work, some outside the home and some run their own-home-based businesses. I have run my accounting business for 12 of the 14 years I homeschooled. (I'm now retired from homeschooling because both of my daughters are in college)
I'm frequently asked to present my workshop titled Wanna be a WAHM (Work at Home Mom) ? at homeschool conventions, so I know this is a hot topic.
Last Tuesday evening I rode with my friend Wendy and her sister to attend a Homeschool Support meeting in a neighboring city. We are not members of this particular group, but the evening's discussion topic, "homeschooling moms who are also working moms" , was of interest to us.
On more than one occasion Wendy and I have discussed the precarious balance between working and teaching. Though somewhat flexible, Wendy's work takes her outside of the home. Already planning ahead for next year, she hopes to finagle a Monday/Tuesday work schedule, but wanted ideas about how to manage the rest of the week to get all her kids' work completed.
Wendy's sister attended the meeting to gather information. She does not currently homeschool; she is a nurse and works long hours. At this time, Wendy cares after her sister's new baby while her sister and brother-in-law are at work. For a short while, Wendy homeschooled her sister's oldest step-daughter. Like I said before, the face of homeschooling is as varied as the families who homeschool-in this case an aunt chose to homeschool her niece.
While the majority of my work is done from home, my goal was to gain encouragement from those who had already "been there and done that" before me. I try to take every opportunity to tuck away those golden nuggets of wisdom from other homeschoolers.
Hosting a support meeting of this nature would be a helpful way for local Homeschool Groups to support their members' possible needs and at the same time, extend an invitation to the local community for anyone interested in homeschooling, struggling with the work issue, or just wanting more information.
Over at The PioneerWoman , Heather L. Sanders shares a blog post with her 6 suggestions for someone planning a support group meeting, especially one that focuses on work and homeschooling.
Work and Homeschool? - Planning a Support Meeting
The following suggestions are intended as a "jump-off" point for anyone wanting to initiate their own meeting(s) to support and encourage home educators who work in or out of the home. -
Suggestion #1: Consider Your Audience When planning a support meeting to tackle the question of working from home and homeschooling, please remember that it isn't just moms who homeschool their children. There are a growing number of dads who homeschool, as well as grandparents, aunts, uncles, siblings and even friends.
Consider the varied nature of homeschool "teachers" and be sure not to alienate your actual "audience" when the invitation is put out for public consumption.
Suggestion #2: Market the Event Whether you live in a large city with multiple homeschool groups or you live in a small town with just one homeschool group, you should still market the meeting as if it were a large event. Print off flyers and place them in your local library, bookstore, office supplies store, churches, community centers, and anywhere else you can think to place them.
Be thoughtful-always ask for permission before taping or pinning something up. Not only will this better ensure your flyer won't be torn down right after you turn away and leave, but it treats the business owner/establishment with the respect they deserve.
I learned of a new online tool to help find and organize homeschool events. Your homeschool group can have a private page to upload files, post events, hold discussions, etc:
Homeschool Event management
HS segue .com (pronounced seg-way) is an interactive homeschool support community serving the interests of parents involved in home school education. The mission of HS segue is to enable homeschoolers to contact homeschooling support communities and professional instructors in order to enhance our kids' education.
HS segue provides homeschool resources and classifieds to help you plan, organize, and administer your homeschool. Below, you can view a brief explanation of HS segue 's sections:
HS segue 's enrichments provide an area of homeschool resources for families to get involved and learn together. Through our Co-Op and Tutored class postings, you can connect with groups of parents providing home school education and enhance the educational experience of your children.
Share Happenings (local events) which may be of interest to other homeschoolers. Social activities, community events, homeschooling support groups' special occasions are some of the posts in Happenings - HS segue 's homeschool classifieds.
Practical Homeschool magazine shares an article written by homeschool mom and co-op teacher, Linda M. Burklin.
Hybrid Homeschool Classes
Linda loved teaching English Literature and Composition at her homeschool co-op, but found that managing her own seven children and co-op was exhausting. Instead of quitting teaching, she came up with the idea of a hybrid class.
She combined email instruction with occasional "seminar" for a small class of students (6 total). She shifted a lot of the teaching burden onto the homeschool parent and student.
Educator Tax Deduction for Homeschoolers?
"You work at least 900 hours a school year in a school that provides elementary or secondary education, as determined under state law."
To work means to get paid for your work as a teacher-employee. Homeschool parents are not employees of a school. We do not get paid; we do not get a W-2. The IRS will check for a W-2 from a school if a taxpayer takes the Educator Expense deduction. Homeschoolers would not have a W-2 from a school, even if your state classifies your homeschool as a private school.
The Educator Expense Deduction was initiated by President Geo W. Bush. It expired with all the other Bush tax cuts,on December 31, 2011. It will not be available for 2012 unless renewed by Congress.
I do not recommend that homeschool parents take the Educators Expense deduction. Sorry.
Carol Topp, CPA
P.S. Here are my required "lawyer" words: Internal Revenue Service Circular 230 Disclosure: Advice relating to federal taxes that is contained in this communication (including attachments) is not intended or written to be used, and cannot be used, for the purpose of avoiding penalties under the Internal Revenue Code or promoting, marketing or recommending to another party any transaction or matter addressed herein.
I include tips, a funny poem and a recipe that eliminates holiday baking.
Give yourself permission to break old habits and discover new traditions.
Eliminate or greatly reduce Christmas baking. This will save time, money and gym fees in January! I quit baking Christmas cookies several years ago. I now bake a less fattening Christmas bread from my grandmother's native country of Finland called pulla (recipe in the ebook). I will bake cookies only if I know they will be given to someone else or taken to a party within one day of baking. I keep less than one dozen for my family.
Don't kid yourself that homemade cards or gifts are less expensive. They cost in time, frustration, supplies, etc.
I would really like to homeschool my 3 children next year and would also like to pick up my daughter's best friend as well. She and her mother have expressed an interest in having me homeschool her. I live in Maryland and am having a hard time finding info on whether or not I can do that and how to go about it. Do you have any info on that kind of thing? From what I understand, I would have to start up a small business. My question is would I have to be a licensed childcare provider? She is 9 years old, and her brother is 4 and I was considering schooling him also.
Thanks ahead of time for any help you can give me! Karen
I'm not an attorney nor familiar with MD homeschool laws, so you'll have to do some homework on whether it is legal to homeschool other people's children.
Some states allow it; others apply restrictions. Many states do not address it at all!
On the issue of tutoring and how much or use of alternative resource a homeschoolers uses, this is a huge NON issue. As long as the parents are overseeing the homeschooling program there is no issue or fear of using educational services.
I hope that's a start!
P.S. For those of you outside of MD, You'll have to do some homework for the homeschooling laws in your state. The links I share are a good place to start!
Homeschool Business and Entrepreneur Directory ™has just been released this week by Paul and Gena Suarez, the publishers of  The Old Schoolhouse magazine. This digital magazine is being sent out to homeschool families around the world.
And it's free to everyone!
Feel free to pass this link to your friends. The directory is 200 pages and shares the following:
What kind of homeschooler are you?
What is your homeschooling style?
Unit Studies
Charlotte Mason Homeschooling
Eclectic Homeschooling
Classical Homeschooling
Homeschoolers in business
The Relaxed Homeschooling Lifestyle
Special needs homeschooling
Gifted homeschoolers
BEST RESOURCES FOR HOMESCHOOL FAMILIES
I have a few articles and ads in the Directory including:
p. 38 "The Ten (Unusual)Roles You'll Play as a Work-At-Home-Mom" article
p. 46 "Accountant to Author: A Home Business Journey" article
p. 47 my ad for Micro Business for Teens, my new book series
p. 124 my ad for my small business consulting and accounting services at CarolToppCPA.com