State Laws from the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) - Comprehensive state-by-state profiles are included in this site from HSLDA. The site also provides links to recent legislation and news, legal analyses and homeschool organizations throughout the country, as well as a color-coded map showing varying degrees of state regulation. ...
Summaries of State Laws Concerning Home Educators' Participation in Public School Activities - The National Center for Home Education, part of the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA), provides this summary of state laws about home education participation in public school activities. In states without laws addressing this situation, it is generally up to the individual schools and school districts to decide whether or not they will allow home-educated students access to services. The national center also has prepared an analysis of the policy trends regarding participation of homeschooled students in public school activities " Equal Access " including court cases that have set precedents for how some states handle the issue. (HSLDA, January 2000) ...
State Policies on Homeschooling PDF - Although every state allows some form of homeschooling, most states do regulate it in some manner. This ECS StateNote identifies: (1) Educational qualifications for homeschool instructors; (2) testing or evaluation requirements for homeschooled students; (3) examples of state policy language pertaining to assessing homeschooled students; and (4) links to state department of education homeschool Web pages. (Mary Fulton, Education Commission of the States, October 2009) ...
Homeschooling in Indiana: A Closer Look - The number of Indiana homeschooled children has increased by 400% over the past eight years, with a current enrollment of 22,403. This brief describes the current homeschooling landscape in Indiana, with sections on: (1) what is known about homeschooling across the United States; (2) the laws and practices governing homeschooling in Indiana; (3) what the research says about the effectiveness of homeschooling; and (4) whether there should be additional regulation or oversight of homeschooling in Indiana. (Robert Kunzman, Center for Evaluation &amp; Education Policy, Summer 2005) ...