Brandon Gonzales, 12, has been using a cellphone since he was 10. Almost all his Sutter Middle School friends have cellphones, too. His mom, Elizabeth Gonzales, likes knowing that he can call home at any time. "It gives me peace of mind," she said. Kids ages 9 to 12 are the fastest-growing cellphone market.
Brandon Gonzales has been carrying his black Pantech cellphone with the slide-out keyboard for two years. Brandon is 12.
And he's certainly not unusual. Over the last decade, the age of kids packing their first cellphone has been dialing back younger and younger.
This month, as millions of students swarm back to school, it's estimated that more than 75 percent of all U.S. teens have a cellphone.
And so-called "tweens" – kids ages 9 to 12 – may be the fastest-growing cellphone market out there.
"The age a child gets a first cellphone is getting progressively younger. Parents want to be in touch with their kids," said John Breyault, who authored a new guide on tweens and cellphones for the National Consumers League (NCL) in Washington, D.C.
For Brandon, a skateboarding tween, having a cellphone is no big deal. Even though he almost doesn't "know anyone who doesn't have one," Brandon said he's not much of a serial texter and only makes occasional calls.
Picking up Brandon outside Sutter Middle School last week, his mom, Elizabeth Gonzales, said he got his first phone at 10 "for safety reasons." Even when he's outside with friends in their midtown Sacramento neighborhood, she likes knowing Brandon can call home in any emergency. "It gives me peace of mind," Gonzales said.
There's plenty of debate over what age kids should get their first cellphone. If you're contemplating the decision, here are some tips from the National Consumers League:
Know the answers
Before heading to the nearest cellphone store, ask yourself some basic questions:
• Why does my child need a cellphone? Will it be used mainly for emergencies or keeping in touch with parents/family? Should it be used for games, Internet access, texting/chatting with friends?
• Does my tween lose things often? Can he/she be trusted to care for a phone?
• How much do I want to spend on the phone itself and its monthly service? Is my tween mature enough to keep texting/calling/data use within the contract limits?
Keeping those questions in mind "can help you stay focused when your tween inevitably starts to drool over phones that may not fit your needs," the NCL notes in its online guide. (For a free copy, go to: www.nclnet.org/technology .)
Have the talk
Discuss the dangers of "sexting" (sending sexually explicit photos by cellphone) and cyberbullying (sending intimidating, harassing messages). Be sure your kids know not to answer calls from unknown numbers and to never share their cell number with people they don't know, especially online.
And, while it may sound silly, explain the risks of texting while bicycling.
Set some boundaries
Sue Watkins, marketing director for a Folsom software company, said her two teenagers got cellphones in middle school, when they began walking to school alone. "It was for us to be able to stay in touch and ensure that if they had any issues, they could reach us throughout the day," said the El Dorado Hills resident.
Knowing how distracting cellphones can be, she and her husband set some ground rules: No phones at the dinner table or while out to eat with family. No accessing the Internet on the cellphone. No texting in bed late at night.
For the most part, it's worked out fine with her 14-year-old daughter and 17-year-old son. And, she notes, given teens' devotion to their digital devices, having a cellphone is a privilege that can be yanked, if needed, for disciplinary reasons.
Picking a plan
First, you want a carrier that covers the areas (school, sports, after-school) where your tween will be using a phone the most.
Next, choose between a prepaid plan and a contract-based plan, where you pay a monthly bill for services.
With a contract, your monthly bill spells out each charge. The phone itself is often heavily discounted. You select a monthly bucket of minutes, texts and data and may be able to place limits on your child's use so you don't rack up extra charges. But you're usually locked into a year-or-more service agreement.
With prepaid plans, you typically pay upfront and don't pay monthly contract or overage fees. Some prepaid plans that bill monthly offer unlimited texting. The phone itself is not usually as discounted.
Gt mi msg?
Texting use is a big issue, so choose that option carefully.
For families with text-happy kids, a more affordable option than per-text fees may be to buy a set amount of monthly text messages or an unlimited plan, which tends to run about $10-$20 a month, says NCL.
When Watkins' first monthly bill arrived with two teen cellphones included, she noticed hundreds of texts that exceeded the family's cellphone contract limits. And the per-text penalty fees were starting to add up.
"It was shocking. We now run between 2,000 and 4,000 texts a month between the two kids. I couldn't do that if I tried," says their mom.
Rather than battling over overcharges for texting fees, the family shifted to unlimited texting. Now, they pay about $140 a month for three phones (hers is work-supplied) with unlimited texting and a shared allotment of 1,400 minutes a month for voice messages.
Keeping tabs
With all the cellphone companies jostling for the tween market, there are plenty of cellphone options aimed at parents. Brands like Kajeet or Firefly Mobile have simplified button commands and let parents program in favorite numbers, as well as restrict incoming/outgoing calls and texts.
Want to know if Natalie got home OK after school? Or if Justin arrived at his friend's house? (And when he left that house?)
Using GPS services like Verizon's "Family Locator" or AT&T's "Family Map", you can get a text on your cellphone when your child – or at least his or her phone – arrives home from school, shows up at soccer practice or heads to a friend's house.
You can even request "Schedule Checks" where at set times – say, 4 p.m., – you'll get an automatic text of your child's cellphone location. When the cellphone leaves that address, you'll get another text. Fees vary.
As Verizon nicely reminds parents, its locator services should "not be used as child management tools" or as "a substitute for adult supervision."
Schools rule
Check with your son or daughter's school for its policy on cellphone use on campus. You don't want an expensive phone confiscated because your kid was caught using it inappropriately.
Before you buy
Have your tween try out the phone. Test the keyboard or number pad and make a test call to check volume. Once you've decided on a particular phone, see what discounts are offered, in-store or online.
And note: Many carriers offer a money-back guarantee within 30 days or so. If the phone isn't working as advertised, you may be able to return it without penalty.
While his black Pantech is not a trendy Android or iPhone like some of his friends have, 12-year-old Brandon Gonzales says he's not bugging his parents for a fancy upgrade. "I'm just grateful to have one," he said.
Reader comments on Sacbee.com are the opinions of the writer, not The Sacramento Bee. If you see an objectionable comment, click the "Report Abuse" link below it. We will delete comments containing inappropriate links, obscenities, hate speech, and personal attacks. Flagrant or repeat violators will be banned. See more about comments here.
What You Should Know About Comments on Sacbee.com
Sacbee.com is happy to provide a forum for reader interaction, discussion, feedback and reaction to our stories. However, we reserve the right to delete inappropriate comments or ban users who can't play nice. ( See our full terms of service here. )
Here are some rules of the road:
• Keep your comments civil. Don't insult one another or the subjects of our articles. If you think a comment violates our guidelines click the "Report Abuse" link to notify the moderators. Responding to the comment will only encourage bad behavior.
• Don't use profanities, vulgarities or hate speech. This is a general interest news site. Sometimes, there are children present. Don't say anything in a way you wouldn't want your own child to hear.
• Do not attack other users; focus your comments on issues, not individuals.
• Stay on topic. Only post comments relevant to the article at hand.
• Do not copy and paste outside material into the comment box.
• Don't repeat the same comment over and over. We heard you the first time.
• Do not use the commenting system for advertising. That's spam and it isn't allowed.
• Don't use all capital letters. That's akin to yelling and not appreciated by the audience.
• Don't flag other users' comments just because you don't agree with their point of view. Please only flag comments that violate these guidelines.
You should also know that The Sacramento Bee does not screen comments before they are posted. You are more likely to see inappropriate comments before our staff does, so we ask that you click the "Report Abuse" link to submit those comments for moderator review. You also may notify us via email at feedback@sacbee.com . Note the headline on which the comment is made and tell us the profile name of the user who made the comment. Remember, comment moderation is subjective. You may find some material objectionable that we won't and vice versa.
If you submit a comment, the user name of your account will appear along with it. Users cannot remove their own comments once they have submitted them.
Select a State: All United States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming
Select a Category: All Job Categories Accounting Admin &amp; Clerical Automotive1 Banking1 Biotech1 Broadcast - Journalism1 Business Development Construction Consultant Customer Service Design Distribution - Shipping Education Engineering Entry Level Executive Facilities Finance General Business General Labor Government Health Care Hotel - Hospitality Human Resources Information Technology Insurance Inventory Legal Legal Admin Management Manufacturing Marketing Nurse Other Pharmaceutical Professional Services Purchasing - Procurement QA - Quality Control Research Restaurant - Food Service Retail - Grocery Sales Science Skilled Labor - Trades Strategy - Planning Supply Chain Telecommunications Training Transportation Warehouse
Make: =============== Model: =============== Price Range: $0 $1,000 $2,000 $3,000 $4,000 $5,000 $6,000 $7,000 $8,000 $9,000 $10,000 $11,000 $12,000 $13,000 $14,000 $15,000 $16,000 $17,000 $18,000 $19,000 $20,000 $21,000 $22,000 $23,000 $24,000 $25,000 $30,000 $35,000 $40,000 $45,000 $50,000 $75,000 $99,000 to No Max $1,000 $2,000 $3,000 $4,000 $5,000 $6,000 $7,000 $8,000 $9,000 $10,000 $11,000 $12,000 $13,000 $14,000 $15,000 $16,000 $17,000 $18,000 $19,000 $20,000 $21,000 $22,000 $23,000 $24,000 $25,000 $30,000 $35,000 $40,000 $45,000 $50,000 $75,000 $99,000 $99,000+ Search within: 10 20 30 40 50 75 100 250 500 All miles of ZIP