Presents have gotten out of hand - right along with that lost meaning of Christmas. But. To answer your question, my favorite present is my brand new PS3 with the Blue Ray copy of the BBC version of "Earth" and Tiger Woods Pro Golf 10.
I got my younger son a cell phone in 8th grade to coordinate band practice pick- ups but I don't think younger kids need them. And I have only one Tv, in the den, so that the kids will hang out with me as a family. But mostly what my kids want (and get) are guitars, amps, and so on. My own favorite gift was earrings the kids picked out for me.
You can tell Kaish that your friends son isn't getting a cell phone till he is in Jr. High and he's 9 too! I'm sticking to my guns on this one. He doesn't need it till he starts having after school activities. Hope you had a wonderful Christmas. Hubs and the boys bought me a new watch and the my parents bought me a Coach purse and my in-laws gave me money. The boys on the other hand have been playing Super Mario Bros for the Wii none stop! They love it since all three of them can play at once.
Great photos!! I totally 100% agree with you on the present thing. My kids got cell phones as they entered high school because that is how they call me at the end of the day when they've stayed after school for their activities. TV in the bedrooms - no way. I got a TV in my room when I was 26. I told them they'd have to wait until they are 26. No PC in their rooms either. Their PC is next to my work PC in my office.
My favorite present - the gift certificate for a facial and a manicure - however on Christmas morning, after breakfast, I sliced my finger with the bread knife and sliced right through my index fingernail so the manicure will have to wait for a bit until the nail grows out....
Merry Christmas and Happy New Year. We will do lunch in the New Year on a dry day with clear roads.
Cell Phone about 15 years old. TV in room when they can afford their own. The more artistic, creative or project-driven the gift, the more likely the kid will get Santa's attention. Those are our rules and they've worked out well for us. (Not that we haven't gone the other route at times, witness Wii game system for my son's B-day..heehee.)
My favorite present was a gift certificate for a local massage place called BackRubz from my love. I'm the one who usually gives out massage certificates. It's enough for two 30 minute massages. I have had exactly one in my life, four years ago and am looking forward to the treat... so is my back.
I got a new camera that comes with lenses:) I've had my other digital camera for over 7 years. It was sooo time to upgrade.
I know what you mean about the kids. Our boys dont have tvs in their rooms,the older one does have a prepaid cell phone..dutch kids are waaaaay more independant here and I dont altogether like it but I need to know he is ok. They dont have computers in their room either and when my oldest comes home and tells me he was on You-Tube it makes me cringe.
The gifts are more hightech and expensive now. I remember when I got a big barbie head that you could put make up on and style her hair. Now it's PSP games and Nintendo DS games that run 40-60 dollars a piece! Im getting old..
I agree on the gifts. You know, Jack, the youngest loved his Kazoo. LOVED it!! It was by far the cheapest and least technological gift her got. I think it got left in the car over night, however so his parents could get some relief. My fav. gift? Phone calls from my sons and the sugarplums. I think your theory about kids getting too much too early is right on. They just grow up too fast these days. I want them to stay young and innocent for a while longer. Great post.
I got lots of useful gifts- which i LOVE- comfy sweats, new sneakers, slippers- the things i don't spend my money on. ;) bnut my best gift has been all of the family moments we have shared using THEIR gifts- board games, books, craft supplies and more!! And the Wii - the best family present thus far- all six of us have been laughing and moving like crazy this week!
I got lots of useful gifts- which i LOVE- comfy sweats, new sneakers, slippers- the things i don't spend my money on. ;) bnut my best gift has been all of the family moments we have shared using THEIR gifts- board games, books, craft supplies and more!! And the Wii - the best family present thus far- all six of us have been laughing and moving like crazy this week!
Good for you standing firm in your convictions. My now 22 year old did not have a cell phone until she was 16 and ONLY then because she was driving and did not have texting on it. I have some friends where everyone in the entire family has a cell phone and text each other -- FROM INSIDE THE SAME HOUSE!!! That absolutely drives me over the edge -- and the kids are 8, 9 & 11. Really? A cell phone at 8? Again, kudos to you!
I agree, they don't need that stuff! My 9 year old has asked for a cell phone for a couple of years, ugh...one of her friends got one in kindergarten (what??!) I mean honestly. And I say if they want to watch tv, they can do it in the family room! My favorite present this year was a handmade sign my cousin made me for my studio!!
I totally agree....my daughter has been wanting a TV in her room too but growing up I never had a TV in my room so she doesn't need oone in hers. As for the cell phone, my daughter has one but we use it. It's only for when she spends the night at someone's house. It's really peace of mind for me, really! My favorite gift this year? My two hood lens and Lightroom 2 software for my camera!!! WOO HOO! My daughter was quite happy when Santa brought her an American Girl doll.
There was a kindergartner in my friend's class who had a cell phone! As for TV in the bedroom....I always said no but made the exception when my daughter was on chemo for 2 1/2 years....she really had nothing else to do....but as soon as she finished, out it came :)
Your Xmas photos are beautiful!
My favorite gift was a new green bike riding jacket- that fits!! I also got a candle, but vanilla...and some chocolate candy :)
I agree whole-heartedly. I used to work as a preschool teacher, and I'd be stunned every year after Christmas when I heard about some of the gifts my students (2-, 3-, and 4-years-old) received!
The best gift I received this year was a sewing basket from my mother-in-law. She filled it up with everything I could possibly need, and is also getting her old sewing machine repaired for me to use. I want to learn to sew, and I was thrilled by this gift!
Last night I was up late watching TV.I never had seen Saving Grace and had no idea what it is about. Will the first minute was full on porno. I have had my TV off for awhile but it seems that the standards are looser and looser. I would never put a TV that is hooked up to cable in a 9 year old's room. They don't need a cell phone either. Your a wise mom, listen to those instincts.
I'm with you as well. So with you. I don't want my kids to get gifts that make them less connected to the real world. And, although I love my cell phone, texting is not looking somebody in the eyes. It just isn't.
I'm with you as well. So with you. I don't want my kids to get gifts that make them less connected to the real world. And, although I love my cell phone, texting is not looking somebody in the eyes. It just isn't.
My favorite gifts was all the smiles! You are not crazy- a nine year old and a cell phone is just asking for trouble. Mine is 11 and wants one. Guess what? NOT! Keep them innocent for as long as you can. &lt;&gt;&lt;
Tara has all that stuff, I'm such a techno junkie... she's had a cell phone since she was 6, but the good news is, she's got it all, so Christmas is about simple stuff...
I loved that my family loved my photo gifts to them. My niece was most excited about a $3 Wal-Mart from with four photos - one of her and hubby, and one of each of her kids. I had calendars made for each family too, with different scenic photos for each month.
I got a really really comfy lap desk for my laptop, and a really comfy bathrobe, oh I love each and everything.
I'm keeping my kids young. No video games, no cell phones, tv's in thier rooms. I always tell them I didn't have a tv in my room until I was out of college! True story! We watched tv as a family. Glad you had a great Christmas!
Always enjoy reading about your family and I'm so very glad you had such a great Christmas!I have four kids and when they were growing up there were no cell phones, there was one TV and it was in the living room. I made many of their presents and still they thought Christmas was the best ever. It still amazes me how much simpler and uncomplicated our lives were then. You have such a wonderful family and Kaishon will always benefit from that. Love all of your photos! Always appreciate your visits and your comments! Wishing you a very Happy New Year! Enjoy!
I know my son asked for a digital camera and Xbox 360 and a Nintendo DSL. We have a Wii already. He is only 7! He got the Star Wars stuff that he asked for. What do you get them as teens when they get all this stuff now?
What a wonderful post! I was so caught up in the pictures and in nodding my head in agreement about the present thing that I didn't realize til the end that it was a "TST" post! And then saw my shout-out... oh, you are SOOOO sweet! Lawd, I've been gone since Christmas to my momma's house in Tennessee, with no computer. It has been wonderful and awful at the same time. And I got back here to find out that YOU are a guest judge at "I Heart Faces" (oh yeah... oh yeah.. it's about time!!), and one of my pics was picked by Pioneer Woman for her bokeh contest. And NOW I find out that you linked to my blog... it's like the perfect trifecta of Christmas happiness!!! :<) Now I need to go look through my pictures and pick the worst of the worst for the outtakes post. Usually, I have a problem coming up with one good pic... but for this one, the problem is narrowing it down to just FIVE!!!!! lol... {{{{hugs}}}}...
The time that we were happy with a book is over or it seems so! I still am happy with books and I think that children don't realise that they are rich to have a roof over their heads and a daily meal. I wish you a very happy New Year, Rebeccah with your wonderful family and friends.
Hi - I just wanted to thank you for stopping by my blog and leaving such sweet comments!!! It's always nice when someone - other than family leaves a comment!! I have enjoyed your blog and seeing your pictures - you have a wonderful family. I am trying to get better at this picture taking thing - my goal for 2010 is to try to learn something everyday -
hope you continue to stop by and I will continue to read up on your adventures. again thanks!!
p.s. just fyi... my cellphone is 3-4 years old and doesn't even have a camera, much less "apps". Dear son will not have one until it's absolutely necessary (when he starts driving, maybe?) We have no TV in our bedroom, and my boy won't have one, either. We're getting a new computer and WILL give him the old one, sans internet connection. Mainly so he'll have a couple of programs available for schoolwork. We are draconian. We are ancient relics. C'est la vie. :<)
Love, love, love your pictures of the kids. The bright shiny faces say happiness all over the place. I totaly agree about cells and tvs. Little kids don't need them. Hubby and I didn't give each other gifts this year. It seemed so strange but with money tight we decided to pool birthdays, Christmas and our January anniversary and go to Disneyland to celebrate. Since we went there on our honeymoon we wanted to go there 46 years later. Sometime in late Jan. or early Feb. will see us getting into the magic. Sue
Far too much stuff! That's the only part of Christmas that I don't like. The overabundance of stuff and the time consumed by finding and wrapping said overabundance. The photos are wonderful, children make wonderful subjects. Happy 2010 to you and yours!
Thank you for leaving a comment about my I Heart Faces entry this week. My goal is to enter as many of the weekly contests as possible, hopefully my photography skills will improve throughout this year, lol! I bought my first DSLR in March right before our daughter (child #3) was born, and I haven't had much time to practice beyond the AF with the camera yet...anyways, thanks for the encouragement!
oh your poor son didn't get his puppy or TV... What kind of mean mommy are you! :D Can you believe kids these days have cell phones at 9 years old (or earlier!) I was lucky to have a pager my Senior year BUT I HAD TO PAY THE BILL!!
My kids do have a TV in their room... but only because it is an old one that used to be mine when i was a teen. I'd be lucky if goodwill took it!
And my favorite gift... well I didn't get anything under the tree. i make my husband promise me every year not to buy me something. I bought myself a photo book of all my kids and events from the year... and that is the best gift ever! I don't care to get gifts now tha ti am older. i would rather spend the extra money on the kids... LOL Im such a mom!
my favorite present? hmmm. . . .maybe the little kiddos who are staying with us now? I dont know, all the clothes that actually fit me? now that I'm a mom, I'm shocked but my college wardrobe doesnt seem to fit my hips any more!!!
I got a great new camera, and I cannot get over how effortlessly I can get terrific shots. But my favorite gift, oddly enough, was NOT having my children for Christmas Day! I thought I would be miserable, with both of them, newly married, spending the holiday with the inlaws; instead, I spoke with both of them via cell phone, spent all day with my mother, father, two sisters and one brother; THEN got to have my children spend the next night, just like they've done all their lives, in their old bedrooms at home and have a second Christmas on Sunday! Ah, bliss!
My favorite gift was from my kids; they sat in front of a green screen at the mall and created a bobbing heads/Elf Yourself-type video that is absolutely hilarious. They paid $13 for it, but I think it's priceless.
I agree - I am afraid to even let my daughter near a computer. I'm happy that she doesn't know that world yet (she is only 4 so it's a little early but I know kids that age that actually spend time playing games online!).