Nothing like a real life example
Sadly enough, there's nothing like a tragic and real example to impact the effect of bullying. Last week a gentleman, a grieving father, travelled from Vermont to tell his heart-wrenching story of his son Ryan who was tortured by bullies (most of which was carried out online, Cyber bullying).
Sadly enough, there's nothing like a tragic and real example to impact the effect of bullying. Last week a gentleman, a grieving father, travelled from Vermont to tell his heart-wrenching story of his son Ryan who was tortured by bullies (most of which was carried out online, Cyber bullying).
John Halligan's son ended up committing suicide in 2003; his daughter was the one who was traumatized after finding her younger brother hanging in the family bathroom early in the morning Oct. 7. The kid was 13 years old. The bullies tagged him as gay; they were relentless in their torment.
The children involved in this type of bullying, most likely, don't see it as a practice so hurtful it could destroy another person. You can be sure those who played a part in the bullying of the Ryan Halligan had many regrets when the truth was revealed in the archived messages found after his death by his father.
The scariest difference between schoolyard bullying and Cyber bullying is not knowing who the bully is. If a bully is on a playground, a school bus, or a teenage dance in front of another kid or teen then at least he/she is recognizable. On the Internet though, a bully can be sending messages using a nickname and is virtually unknown to the victim. The unknown is a scary thing. Just imagine feeling like a target and not knowing who have you on their radar. You don't know where the hate is coming from, you only know it's there. It has to be the most unnerving feeling, to never really know where or when you are safe.
The Internet has great conveniences and great technology that, if used properly, is a great tool but unfortunately it has become playground and a preying ground for horrific actions, perverts, bullies, terrorists...you name it.
A kid, aka bully, could easily drive another child to suicide from the comfort of his/her own bedroom, the family supper table or a classroom because of the ever-growing use of texting, instant messaging and chat rooms.
And you can see them as young as 13 and 14 years old going around doing their texting thing, in the malls, waiting at the bus stop, even at school or wherever kids hang out.
If parents think there is nothing wrong with their kid having a cellphone, then they should see nothing wrong with going in and having a look at the messages in their inboxes and outboxes. Kids/teens need to be monitored that's why they have parents. No parent wants to pick up their child's cellphone, or computer after a suicide to learn their child was being bullied to the brink or worse again, their child was the bully.
You hear many teachers complain today of children using cellphones for texting in classrooms; well, there is a simple solution to that. Ban cellphones in school or on school property. The purpose of going to school is to learn from the teacher and in the classroom, not from instant messaging or chatrooms. It's ridiculous to say that a kid 'needs' a cellphone in case he or she needs a ride or whatever...that's a lame excuse, how did the previous generation get by and get educated?
Teachers should have the authority to take the cellphone and hold it for a period of time (punishment) if a student is found to use it in the class, the parents should be called and informed. If there is another instance, then the student should lose the phone for longer and then the third time, it's should be held until the end of the term.
There's no sense in unloading all these tools on kids and expect them to be adult in their usage of them. It could prove to be a deadly weapon and a lifelong lament for parents and loved ones.
We ask that users remain courteous. You may not post insulting, discriminatory or inappropriate content, which may be removed at our discretion. We are not responsible for user content and opinions. Use of this site as well as content submission & ownership are governed by our Conditions of Use and Privacy Policy.
Member organizations should be non-profit in nature, and promote legal activities. Any organization found promoting illegal activities or commercial products or services will be deleted from the site.