'Anyone who has ever built sandcastles will feel an immediate affinity with Bodiam, it looks like the work of a giant bucket and spade.'
Gervase Jackson-Stops.
The impressive towers and broad moat of Bodiam Castle are like a scene from a fantasy as you gaze at them for the very first time.
At a quick glance it appears to be the very epitome of a medieval castle, untilcloser inspection is given.
One soon discovers that it was built at an evolutionary stage when the Nobility were looking for more comfortable, agreeable places to live that offered them security, but alsorepresented an outward show of their wealth and rank.
Comparatively few of its type were built and it should be more accurately described as a Courtyard Castle.
Castles built in this period were the last truecastles to be built in England, they provided security and also separate suites of rooms for the Lord, his domestic staff, guests and garrison.
When Edward III signed the treaty of Bretigny in 1360 he renounced his claim to the Crown of France whilst retaining Aquitaine, Calais and other important provinces.
He was unable, and perhaps not too bothered,about evacuating his forces from the remainder of France, and these men soon banded together.
This was the time of the 'Free Companies' or 'Routiers', private mercenary armies who would normally be under thecontrol of the King but who now sold their services to the highest bidder.
They indulged in looting and destruction on an appalling scale with many men gaining great wealth and notoriety from such expeditions.
At this time in the history of the Hundred Years War, there was a rise in the more professional soldier.
The leadership in the field was being handed down to the lesser nobility and many took this opportunity to gaininfluence and great wealth.
Men such as Bertrand du Guesclin, Sir Thomas Dagworth, Sir Robert Knolles and Sir Hugh Calveley all became commanders of the so called 'Free Companies', acting sometimes with the blessingof their King and sometimes without, but all the time causing havoc and destruction wherever they operated in France.
It was under the command of Robert Knolles that the builder of Bodiam Castle built his reputation and wealth.
Sir Edward Dalyngrigge was something of a character in his day, he belonged to an old established
Sussex family who came from present day Dalling Ridge, near East Grinstead, but returned from France in 1377 much more wealthier and powerful.
It was after he married Elizabeth Wardeux he came into possession ofthe Manor of Bodiam in 1378
This manor house was not where the present Castle stands, but to the North of Bodiam Church in the adjacent valley of the Kent ditch.
The site was excavated in the 60's and 70's and pottery finds indicated it wasin use from the late 13th century until the building of the Castle.
The Wardeux family had acquired the manor by marriage to the de Bodeham family, who had held it since the conquest when it was given to Hugh of
Eu.
He gave it to his son who took the name de Bodeham from the name of the Saxon settlement on the site.
Sir Edward Dalyngrigge was a Knight for the Shire of Sussex for 10 Parliments between 1379 and 1388 and was without doubt one of the most powerful men in Sussex at this time, along with his Patron the Earl of
Arundel.
England at the end of the 14th century was seriously under threat of invasion from the French; the victories of Crecy and Poitiers were a distant memory as the French slowly clawed back her possessions.
Piracy was rife in the channel and in 1377 Rye and Winchelsea were both sacked and burned.
In 1380 Dalyngrigge was part of a Kings commission to consider the state of the country, its possessions and expenses ofthe Royal Household.
In the same year he was also appointed to survey the town of Winchelsea and consider how it may be fortified against the French.
This was of great importance to Dalyngrigge as his manor wasabout 14 miles upstream from Winchelsea on the River Rother and could easily be reached by more raiding parties.
He was probably more guilty of piracy and pillage in the past than the French raiders he wascommanded to keep out!
Hastings was also attacked soon after and in answer to this on 21 October 1385, Dalyngrigge was given licence to ;"Crenellate his house to protect the inland reaches of the Rother and halt the French advances"At this time many castles and manor houses were either rebuilt of fortified such as Cooling Castle and Scotney Castle to counter any invasion.
Dalyngrigge combined the best features of these together with thosehe had first hand experience of in France to build Bodiam.
He was unlikely to have been at Bodiam during the initial stages of building, as he was appointed Captain of the French port of Brest between 1386-87.
By1390 the threat of invasion had receded and Sir Edward was appointed to several commissions, one to conclude a truce with the King of France and another to survey the Castles and fortresses of Calais and Picardy.
In the same year he was one of nine Knights who put their Seal to a letter to the Pope deploring the excesses of the Church.
In 1395 he was to further improve his status when appointed by the King as Keeper ofthe Tower of London and Governor of the City.
Dalyngrigge was no doubt living in his newly built Castle by this time, but wasn't to enjoy it for long.
He died in 1395 and was succeeded by his son, Sir John
Dalyngrigge.
The information we have on the early life of Bodiam is rather obscure and what information we do have is largely thanks to Lord Curzon .
He brought together all the information for the first time in his book " Bodiam
Castle" published in 1926, and it is thanks to his excellent research that we know what we do of the castle today.
The castle was to remain in the Dalyngrigge family until 1483 when it came to another famous Sussex family, The Lewknors by marriage.
Sir Thomas Lewknor was a Lancastrian and was attainted by Richard III.
The Kingissued a commission in 1483 to the Earl of Surrey and other loyal Nobles, authorizing them;To levy the men in the Counties of Kent and Sussex to besiege the Castle of Bodyham which the rebels have seized.'
The castle was given up without a struggle and no damage was done to its walls.
After Bosworth, the castle was again back in the hands of the Lewknors and passed to several minor heirs of the family.
At the time of the civil war it was in the hands of John Hufton, 2nd Earl of Thanet.
He was a staunch Royalist but in 1644 he sold it to Sir Nathaniel Powel, a Parliamentarian.
It does not appear to have beenactively involved in the war or dismantled by General Waller in 1643 as has been suggested.
There is no damage to any of the exterior walls and shows no sign of bombardment, the only damage visible is in theinterior.
The Castle was only inhabited again during a brief period in the 18th Century when a small cottage was erected inside, by the Postern Tower.
The Castle suffered from the usual pilfering of stone and slowly turnedinto the ivy clad ruin the mid 18th century drawings and paintings show.
A local Squire from Brightling, John 'Mad Jack' Fuller, rescued the Castle in 1815.
The Castle was going to be dismantled when Fuller paid £3000 to save it from destruction.
Fuller was a huge, fat man who was anMP for many years in Sussex.
He was thrown out of Parliament on several occasions for his unruly behavior, and many of his follies litter the landscape around Brightling.
A very popular man locally, he did a lotfor the poor, a whole book has been written on his exploits.
His grave, or rather, Pyramid is 25ft tall and stands in the lovely Churchyard at Brightling.
It is said that he is buried in the centre, sitting in hisfavorite chair, wearing top hat and tails with a bottle of his best Claret and a cooked chicken!
Dalyngrigge would, I'm certain have approved.
The Castle was sold again in 1864 by Fuller's grandson for £5000 to
Lord Ashcombe, who undertook many vital repairs over the next 40 years.
Lord Curzon first saw Bodiam in 1905 while Warden of the Cinque Ports and immediately fell in love with it.
It wasn't until 1916 that he was able to negotiate its sale.
His wife tells that after his first visit hereturned and proposed to her in the beautiful setting of Winchelsea Church.
Curzon embarked on a grand programme of research and restoration with his Architect William Weir and it is thanks to him that we can allenjoy this beautiful castle today.
He left it in his will to The National Trust who have continued his work.
Bodiam Additional Information
Bodiam is owned and managed by The National Trust
Open all year round.
Hours - Feb-Nov 10 until 6 or dusk if earlier.
Nov- Feb 10 until 4.
Closed on Monday.
Entry - Adults - £3.50, Children - £1.65, Family Ticket - £8.25.
Telephone - 01892 - 891001.
Site Office.
Os Map 199: ref TQ 782256.
Bodiam Castle
The Castle has excellent car parking facilities and can be also reached by a No 349 Bus from Hastings Station.
Nearest Railway station is Robertsbridge  ( 5miles ).
The Castle entrance is 1/4 mile walk from the Car park but special arrangements for people with disabilities can take them to the entrance.
There is wheelchair access to the Castle but not the Towers.
Dogs are     permitted on the site but not allowed in the Castle.
Picnics are welcome to be taken in the grounds but not in the castle.
Bodiam Castle is one of the most famous and evocative in Britain and is probably the most ideal for a visit with children.
An excellent Guidebook is available on the castle and its history along with many giftsand books for children in a well-stocked shop.
There is also has a very reasonable restaurant alongside although these are only open from February until the end of October.
The Castle and grounds can get very busy during the School holidays and summer months but a visit with entry just before 5 O'clock, as they lock the gates, on a summer evening is well worth it.
It ensures you arelocked in with a closing time to be out at 6.
(A castle to yourself for an hour).
Winter is not so busy and a visit on a fine, crisp, winters day can be a very rewarding.
Although the exterior is in excellentcondition some may find the interior a little disappointing, for these people, I leave you with the words of Lord Curzon:"At Bodiam, not only does the watery cincture remain, but no trace of the modern world appears to invade the ancient and solitary beauty of the scene.
It could hardly surprise anyone, were a train of richly clad Knights, falcons on their wrists, and their ladies mounted on gaily caparisoned palfreys, suddenly emerge from the Barbican Gate, for the enjoyment of the chase.
Or even the flash of spearheads and the clatter of iron-shod hooves to indicate the exit of a party with more serious intent."
Information was obtained from
The Hundred Years War - Christopher Allmand.
The Hundred Years War - Anne Croft.
The Hundred Years War - The English in France - Desmond Seward.
Castles in Sussex - John Guy.
The Castle in Medieval England & Wales - Colin Platt.
Bodiam Castle - Lord Curzon of Kedleston.
Bodiam Castle - David Thackray.
Fuller, The Life and Times of John Fuller of Brightling - Geoff Hutchinson
Plantagenet Encyclopeadia - Elizabeth Hallem
Sussex - Desmond Seward
Sussex Place Names - Judith Glover
The National Trust Handbook - 1998.