TODDLER PROGRAM
Welcome to our toddler program, offered to you and your child by Pinecrest Schools. We are pleased to be chosen as your child's caregiver for these early years.
Before your child "opens the door to wonder" at our new facility, allow us to tell you about the characteristics of our toddler center and program.
All young children deserve healthy environments in which they can grow and thrive. Our toddler center:
Is homelike
. . . because young children spend most of their waking hours in them. Like a home, our center is a place where children can:
Relax and be themselves
Feel safe and secure
Be with the same caregivers every day
Work and play using different kinds of furnishings and varied lighting
Is child-sized
. . . because this creates greater opportunities for success. Imagine being in the Land of the Giants, a place where everything is too big, too high, or out of reach. Children need environments that are scaled to their size. Our center has:
Child-sized furniture
Ceilings low enough for proper acoustics
Windows at children's eye level
Doors, sinks, toilets and water fountains that are "child friendly"
Is a palette for children's self-expression
. . . because this promotes pride, accomplishments and recognition. Pleasant and personal surroundings affect perception, creativity and learning. Our center is characterized by:
Neutral tones for backgrounds and ceilings, with pleasing colors for accents
Space for children's art, located at the children's eye level
Space for objects that children bring to share or have special meaning
Has indoor and outdoor spaces for physical activities
. . . because this provides an emotional outlet and promotes self-esteem and good health. Toddlers don't just move to get from place to place - they run, jump, hop, skip, roll and climb. They move for the sheer joy of it, and for the discoveries that movement brings. Our center has places, both indoors and outdoors which allow for:
Balancing and bouncing
Is structured yet flexible
. . . because predictability and ownership create a sense of security. Organizing space and time in our center is important, but this order needs to be comprehensible to the children as well as to the adults. Structure is based on program goals, rather than imposed for tidiness. Structure is flexible to allow for exceptions, individuality - and the delight of surprise. Our program offers different spaces in the center which:
Can be recognized by children - perhaps by different colors or coverings on the floor
Are for quiet and active play
Can be rearranged by children for their own activities
Has a professionally trained and caring staff
. . . because we care about each child entrusted to our center. A caregiver spends a considerable amount of time tending to each toddler's needs. Our staff is:
Trained to provide this care in a loving and caring manner
Instructed to encourage toddlers to feed themselves while directly supervising them
Ready to assist with toilet training, when the child shows signs of readiness
Offers a healthy and appealing menu
Program Overview
Your child learns to follow simple directions. Positive self-discipline techniques will be introduced. Your child learns to participate in simple routines. Your child will start to respond to praise.
Language and Communication Development
Your child will be encouraged to communicate simple experiences. Teachers will talk with and read to your child. Your child will learn songs, poems and the use of books. Your child will be encouraged to use role play and "pretend" games.
Cognitive Development
Your child will learn body parts and their names. Your child's caregiver will introduce your child's community and the people in the community. Your child will be introduced to primary colors and shapes. Your child will begin to learn about seasons, weather, holidays and monthly themes.
Gross Motor Development
Your child will engage in many motor movement activities such as jumping, crawling, rolling, running, walking,waving and climbing. Teachers will introduce riding toys and large building blocks. Your child will be encouraged to use large balls for throwing, rolling and basket games.
Fine Motor Coordination
Your child will start to use small drinking cups and spoons. Teachers will introduce large beads for stringing. Your child will be encouraged to use crayons, paint brushes and finger paints. Your child will explore the use of 3 and 4 piece puzzles, large pegs into pegboards, and shapes into shape boxes.
What To Bring
1. Diapers and wipes are to be brought from home. We will give you a 2 day notice on your child's daily chart when new diapers or wipes are needed. Please bring in a full pack of diapers and wipes with your child's name clearly marked. We do not allow Pull-up's. Please do not send them. If your child runs out of diapers, you will be charged $1.00 per diaper until a new package is received.
2. Please be sure your child has 3 changes (shirt, pants, and socks) of weather appropriate clothing. Include an extra pair of shoes. Clothes can be stored in a diaper bag with your child's name on the outside.
3. Please bring a crib-sized blanket for naptime. Mark it with your child's name. The blanket needs to go home on Fridays for washing.
4. Please bring a non-drip sippy cup for your child, to be kept here at school. We do not allow bottles and pacifiers.
5. Do not bring toys from home. Small stuffed animals are permitted. Please make sure that your child's name is on every item brought from home.
6. Please DO NOT bring breakfast or any other food for your child to eat at school. All children need to have breakfast before arriving. Please be advised morning snack time is 9:15 a.m.
Separation From Parent
Starting school can be an anxious experience for both parent and child. The process of separation from the parent as the child enters and attends preschool is one of the most important accomplishments your child can learn. Each child reacts differently. As they mature they begin to identify themselves as independent personalities. In separating from you your child will learn:
To develop an interest in the activities of the preschool
To feel comfortable with others at preschool
To understand that their parents will come back
and pick them up
To understand that all parents leave their child and
come back for them
To understand that parents often must concentrate on their own interests and duties which separate and are different from those of the child's
To help you and your child through this developmental stage may we suggest:
You see that your child is involved in a specific activity or is in the hands of one of his/her teachers before you leave
Tell your child when you are leaving
Say 'Goodbye' positively and leave the room quickly, avoid prolonged good-byes
Ask your teacher for help in separation
Your child's crying is normal and is expected at this age. Crying is usually for the parents benefit and is their way of saying "Goodbye, I'll miss you, I Love You."
Your child will soon come to trust his teachers and feel comfortable with his new surroundings. We will keep you informed of his progress. Please feel free to call us any time to see how your child is adjusting. Our goal is to make your child's transition to school a positive and happy experience for all.
Potty Training Procedures
Bladder and bowel training is a developmental skill. Each child ultimately teaches himself or herself. However, when your child shows the first signs of readiness cooperation between the school and the home can teach this learned skill quickly, easily and without trauma (to parent, child or teachers).
To begin potty training the child must be physically ready. They must have voluntary control of the bladder and bowel. This is usually manifested by a long time between urinations, waking up dry from naps, regular bowel movements and have the desire to sit on the potty and wear 'big kid underwear.'
When your child is ready.......... We will need the following items at school:
3-4 pairs of cotton training pants or underwear (No Pull-ups)
3 complete changes of clothing, including socks an extra pair of shoes
We will offer support, peer support and positive reinforcement of success. Accidents will occur. "Failure" to use the potty is not a FAILURE. No anger or disappointment will be expressed by the staff. When the child expresses the need to 'potty' they will be tended to immediately. The staff will also remind the child to go potty often, before and after each activity.
Clothes worn to school at this time should be easy for both the child and teacher to remove quickly. Clothing that is easily taken down, elastic topped pants and shorts (no straps, belts, buttons, snaps, overalls), dresses for girls are very practical. Think about how your child can remove the clothing themselves.
Both girls and boys will learn to use the potty in a sitting position. They will learn to use toilet paper and after a bowel movement they will be checked by the teacher for cleanliness. Hands will be washed with soap and water after each attempt.
The same procedure should be followed at home. Respond immediately to your child's need to go. Be patient, Be positive. Your child WILL decide they have to go to the bathroom five minutes AFTER you left home and are in the car or in line at the store! You will soon learn where the bathrooms are in all stores! You will join the legion of Parents Being Potty-Trained!!! Keep your sense of humor and keep plenty of plastic bags and wipes handy.
Communication will be extremely important between the school and home at this time. We will send home daily progress reports. Remember that your child will succeed at their own pace. If it doesn't work the first time, no one has failed... your child just isn't ready. Soon enough they will be!!!
All attempts and successes will be rewarded with stamps, stickers, YAH-HOOS, ringing of a bell and/or sweet treats. Please inform us of any objections to any of these rewards. Thank You!
Health Policy
As a service to our parents, room 3 teachers will administer medications prescribed by your physician. All medications (prescriptive and over the counter, including topical are given as a courtesy at 12:00 and/or 3:00). Medication must be in the original container with the child's name on the label, as well as the prescription number, name of the medication, dosage and expiration dates. Please add the child's room number. A permission to administer medication form must be signed and accompany the medication. Please ask your child's teacher for the form. All medications must be kept in or on top of the classroom refrigerator.
Colds, flu and other contagious diseases seem to occur frequently and spread easily among toddler children. To help protect your own child's health-and to minimize the possibility of contagion at school, please keep your child at home if your child has any of the following symptoms:
Nasal discharge that is green, yellow or cloudy
Your child complains of ear pain or is pulling at their ear
Has a productive cough
Has a severe sore throat, with fever or swollen glands
Body rash with fever or oozing sores
Eyes that are pink, burning or itching or has a discharge
Diarrhea or vomiting
Just not feeling well, unusually tired, cranky, lack of appetite, confused, extremely clingy.
If these symptoms of possibly contagions are observed in your child during the day, you will be called to pick up your child immediately.
*When your child has a fever or diarrhea, please keep them at home an additional 24 hours after the symptoms return to normal. This will help to ensure that the illness has actually passed and that your child will be well enough to resume school activities. A note from your child's physician may be required before your child can return to class.
Head LiceThis is a very common occurrence in young children. This has nothing to do with cleanliness. They are very easily transmitted by leaning back in an upholstered chair where someone had previously sat who had head lice. Random lice checks are conducted by staff. If head lice is found on a child, the following steps are taken:
Parents are notified and child must be picked up immediately
The child's head must be treated with a product formulated to remove head lice for two weeks.
Nits must be removed with a special nit comb included in the product.
The child will be excluded from school the following day
Upon returning to school state health laws require examination of hair and scalp by staff before returning to school.
To avoid reinfestation it is important to inspect all family members for two weeks and treat again if infected. Nits on the scalp may be seen more easily on the hair at the back of the neck and above the ears. Please be assured that we will do everything possible to prevent infestation in our center. With your support, we will stop the lice from spreading.
Disaster PreparednessOur school has an emergency disaster plan in place. Your child's teachers and staff members are First Aid and CRP certified and prepared to handle any emergency.
Pinecrest Schools
Pinecrest Schools is a nine campus private school with schools in Valencia, Lancaster, Canyon Country, Van Nuys, Woodland Hills, Northridge, Simi Valley, Moorpark and Thousand Oaks. Our mission is simply Quality education and childcare at an affordable price.
We offer Child Care from 18 months, toddler preschool through elementary and middle school.