"I can do it myself, Mama", those are words that fill my heart with motherly pride and also, make me a little sad that my baby girl isn't a baby anymore.
Discovering independence is a natural part of growing up and as a parent, it is our job to ensure that our kids grow up to be self-reliant, independent adults.
Here are some fun ways to encourage independence in young children:
1. Free Play Time Makes an Independent Toddler
Being allowed to play freely and without much instruction or direction is a great way to let a child explore options, exercise choice and act on his own. Free play means letting a child deal with the blocks or the paint book on his own.
If you've been deeply involved in your child's play activities, this means stepping back a little and seeing what he'd do when left on his own. Sure, he may make a mess of the paints or topple over a tower just as soon as he constructs it, but let him see that.
Instruct if you have to but don't direct.
2. Fun Decisions to Build Independence
Headed to the mall for some ice-cream? Ask your toddler which one he'd like instead of automatically picking out a favorite. Give her choices when dressing up for school. Offer options during reading or craft hour. Learning to make simple decisions is a big thing for a preschooler. So, make sure you use opportunities to let them make a few decisions every day.
3. The Helpin' Out Game to Boost Confidence
Toddlers love to help. Mine is a constant companion when I'm hanging out the laundry to dry or in the kitchen baking. Helping an adult makes toddlers feel all grown-up. It may take a bit longer to finish a task but it gives a child the sense of confidence that he needs to try bigger and more complicated activities independently.
4. Play the Patience and Praise Card
It can be frustrating for a parent to watch a toddler struggle laboriously over his shoes or the buttons on his shirt. You may be tempted to jump in and do it yourself or worse, yell "Hurry up!"
Don't. Instead, play the patience card and if possible, factor in extra time when getting ready for school. Offer to help if you can see your li'l one getting frustrated but don't just do it yourself.
Praise is another fun way of encouraging kids to be independent. My daughter, after watching the Potty Tots DVD, exclaims, "I did it!", each time she goes to the bathroom independently. We high-five and I can actually see her glow with pride. Use fun ways to praise your child for small but significant acts of independence.
The Potty Tots are participating in the Walmart Get on the Shelf Contest . They'd LOVE to reach more parents and kids all over the globe and could really use your help! Just like American Idol, You can vote for them as many times as you want everyday!VOTING is March 7th- April 3 rd .
Post by Prerna Malik , the resident Potty Tots blogger and mama to a Potty Tots Fan.
If you are looking for great child care during the holidays there is a great event being held Thursday December 8th to introduce KinderCare's Winter Camp. Check out all they have to offer. There will even be snow! See details below!
It's snowing in San Diego!
Join KinderCare for a morning sneak preview of Winter Camp!  You and your child(ren) will have a great opportunity to spend the morning engaging in a few of the winter science activities KinderCare will offer during its  annual camp.
It gets even better! Play in the KinderCare snow scene - made with real snow!  We're making it extra special for the kids and creating a snow-filled playground where they enjoy a really fun morning just for them!
KinderCare's Winter Camp is specifically designed to offer a balance of fun with learning during school winter break. While introducing kids to activities they love, seasonal camps are a great solution for  parents, who may need to work or catch up on holiday shopping and errands, with a great way for  their child to have fun and learn.
KinderCare Winter Camp is offered for both preschool and school-age children during the last two weeks in December.  From the magic of flight to the science of chemical reactions, children can learn through educational and hands-on themed activities, including "Bubble Trouble," "Volcano Blast," "Helicopter Propellers," and "Balloon Rockets."   KinderCare's Winter Camp reinforces key subjects such as language arts; math and science; and creative expression.  This season Camp runs December 19 - December 23.
At Potty Tots we are so excited to be a part of the Blogsphere! Potty Tots are helping children around the world with potty training and now we have another place on the world wide web to share potty training tips as well as advice on all things toddler!
Stay tuned for potty training advice from Miss Maggie, videos, special guest bloggers, promotions and giveaways!
Parents you can find all kinds of information about signs of readiness , potty training tips, FAQs and answers on our website. We even have a page "Just for Tots" where your little one can meet the Potty Tots and play games with them! We invite you to visit us on the web at www.pottytots.com
Recent Posts
Potty Training FAQ's and Tips
Select Category Parenting Your Toddler Uncategorized
Get 25% OFF at the Potty Tots Store in March!
To all our loyal Potty Tots Fans , we'd like to thank you with an exclusive discount on all Potty Tots products! Go to http://www.pottytots.com and enter the following promo code at checkout Promo code for March: PTShamrock25 for 25% off all Potty Tots merchandise Valid through March 1st to March 31st! Go now!
Potty Tots Parents Speak
"Dear Potty Tots, I can't thank you enough for the potty kit you put together! We have been working on potty training for 8 months with my daughter and after reading books, trying other programs this instantly clicked and made her super excited! We have been doing it for four days now and she has had no accidents and has all the Potty Tot songs memorized! She asks all the time to watch the DVD and tells me the steps all day long! She loves the Toilet Bowl Game. We use two girls ...one for pee pee and one for poo poo. Thanks again! I will recommend Potty Tots to everyone I know!!" Shawnee C. Colorado
Potty Training Tip
Potty Training can be scary enough without those monster automatic flushing toilets! When using the public automatic flush toilets, bring small post it stickies to place over the sensors. This will help prevent the toilet from flushing while your child is wiggling on the potty.