So you've realized your child is ready to begin potty training. What now? Where do you begin? What sort of equipment do you need? Learn from others, and take the opportunity to share your own comments, tips and stories! minimize... So you've realized your child is ready to begin potty training. What now?... more...
post Tags ?
Quick question
We started potty training DS about 2 weeks ago and he is doing really good. He only uses a diaper for naps and bedtime. At home he uses a small potty and daycare he goes in the toilet. My problem is when we are out and about he freaks out and refuses to sit on the toilet. So we either have to put a diaper on him if we are going out of town or make short trips. He can stay dry for up to 2 hours or so.
Any tips on how I can get him to lose fear over going in public restrooms. We bought a travel seat thing for toilets but it doesn't stay in place. Maybe I need to buy a different one.
Comments for Post (9)
If it's for peeing, I taught my boys to stand and pee. If they were too short to clear the toilet, I'd have them stand on my feet. For pooping, try using the portable seat cover you have on your toilet at home to show him it's not scary. Do it fully clothed, and explain to him you are just showing him. Is great he is doing so well!
Yes some of those portable seats slide on toilets. Public toilets can be really long and oval with split in front. I use a Potette seat on toilets, it's VERY sturdy, unlike folding foam or plastic ones. Or look for ones with clips that go under the seat. Overall, it's worth it to buy a decent one cause we use it daily. I use the Potette at home on the toilet too so she's used to it. Having him sit sideways or facing toilet tank is good too. I also carry a small potty in the car. I put a platic grocery bag in the bowl lined with paper towels. The paper absorbs mess. You grab handles, tie and toss. I've used it many times on road trips to the cottage, when public bathrooms are nasty, if stuck in traffic and she needs to go "now" lol!
We went to my parents for the weekend last weekend and we took his potty and he did great. It's not heavy at all and it fits in a plastic bag but I would hate to have to carry it when I go to the mall or something.
I found out at daycare he sits facing the tank so we will start trying that at home. Hopefully that will get him more comfortable to go in public. I will also look into a Potette. I know we will use it alot and I also don't really want him sitting on a public toilet. I even try to avoid it lol
Amar, where did you get the potette, and what exactly is it? I have been trying to get a fold up seat for my diaper bag but they've been sold out. Is thus thing you have better? Is it easy to carry around? I need something because my son is so little and will never feel safe sitting on a public toilet, nor do I want him to.
I got it at Toysrus. It's actually a potty that has short legs and no bowl but you can put a bag into it. I don't use it that way cause dd doesn't like it that way. We do use it as a ring seat on the toilet and it's very sturdy and comes in a bag. It's not as light as foam seats (which I also have) but sturdier. My dd was tiny and still is. We did EC and I started her at 6 months. She's now 30 months but only 21 lb so I get small kids. Folding seats can work ok too but slide on those big long toilets. I don't suggest carrying a potty in a plastic bag into the mall. I suggest keeping the potty in the car with a plastic bag in the bowl to ped into it. Then you toss the bag and the bowl is clean. My dd uses it on the back seat or in the trunk as we have an suv. It's not a big deal.
All contents copyright © BabyCenter, L.L.C. 1997-2012 All rights reserved. This Internet site provides information of a general nature and is designed for educational purposes only. If you have any concerns about your own health or the health of your child, you should always consult with a physician or other healthcare professional. Please review the Privacy Policy and Terms of Use before using this site. Your use of the site indicates your agreement to be bound by the Terms of Use.
This site is published by BabyCenter, L.L.C, which is responsible for its contents as further described and qualified in the Terms of Use .