When potty training girls (toddlers 18 - 36 months) you want to have a clear understanding of what method or technique you want to use, have a plan for consequences and rewards, and a long term plan for nap time, car rides and public restrooms. Also, make sure that you have all the tools ready and accessible for your toddler to be successful. Here is a basic potty training checklist to get you started...
Featured Articles
" Potty training is a learning experience for both parents and children. When it comes to potty training girls, the good news is that girls are a little more advanced than boys. However, it will still take persistence and consistency to help teach them to use the potty and no longer use a diaper. ..." Read More
" When potty training hygiene is definitely a consideration for both genders, however, special consideration need to be given to avoid future problems with infection. Even after a child has been potty trained and has accepted the full responsibilities associated with potty training i.e. getting to t ..." Read More
" Bed-wetting can happen during the toilet training time and even occasionally afterwards. The child's body has simple not made all the connections yet to let them know that their bladder is full and they need to wake up to use the bathroom. This is especially true when potty training, however you ..." Read More
" Many first time moms are hesitant to start potty training; they talk to their pediatrician, read books and ask the advice of friends. You ask how to potty train, and what age to start potty training; this can be a little tricky as each child develops at his or her own rate, however a recent s ..." Read More
" Potty training can take different amounts of time for every child. Since every child is different, there is no quick answer on how to get a child to toilet train. However, there are some definite tips and tricks that can help with the potty training and hopefully get the child to want to use th ..." Read More
" Many parents wait to potty train their four year old, however this is a long time to wait when there are no behavioral or mental problems that are taking place. This is an important milestone that a child needs to meet and they cannot go to preschool if they are not toilet trained yet by this a ..." Read More
Customer Testimonials
" Potty Training Pants - Padded - 3 Pack If you are looking for a good training pa ..."
" The Potty Patty Kit While we started with videos and books (Alona Frankel's ..."
" Potty Training in One Day - The Complete System For Girls Hello, I have a two-year ..."