Adventures in Potty Training Part 1
This is the first article in a series of our adventures in potty training. I wrote this when my son was learning to use the potty. He is older now and it is mostly a distant memory. I hope you will come away from these articles with a few ideas, some laughter and some hope.
Remember this one thing - when it seems like there is no hope, no end to it, know that they will learn it eventually. Like all the stages kids go through, none of them last for very long.
So here we go:
I was tired of diapers. That's it. That's the main reason. That and we could use the money. You may be thinking one or two things right now. Either I am a bad mom for what you think is pushing my son into it too soon or you are where I'm at now and can relate. Either way you are probably right.
I have heard potty training requires a lot of patience, but I was unprepared for how much patience is really needed. An unbelievable amount of patience is required for this. You need patience, patience and more patience. Did I mention you need patience?
I had read articles and ideas from other parents from all over the Internet and all I really discovered was there are just as many different ways to train your little poop machine as there are people. It's amazing how many different approaches there are.
We are doing a kind of "Boot Camp" type of potty training where we go without diapers at home and use a pull up over underwear when out in case we have an accident.
I want to do it this way even though it will take all my time for a few days. I much rather take off work for a few days to master this than drag it out over weeks or even months. Who has the time and patience for that long?
I bought some really cute cartoon underwear he loves. You will want to let them pick them out as they will be less inclined to "soil" their favorite cartoon characters. It's amazing how small these underwear are!
Anyway, I think I'm prepared with at ton of rewards, bribes and cleaning supplies on hand.
So I decided to take the no-nonsense, don't wait forever to start approach. Though my son is only 2, I feel many parents wait way too long to start. I don't want to wait till when we "have" to as he's starting pre-school. That kind of pressure may be too much for him and me. He has been showing the signs of interest and though he isn't good at all of them I feel he is ready.
About the author
Im Not A Supermom
I am a freelance writer, which means I write in my spare time. And spare time for a busy mom means writing way too early in the morning when I'm supposed to be working out, after my family is in bed or while dinner is burning on the stove. I have even been known to pound out a few paragraphs while my 3 year old is pooping on the toilet!
If you're a parent, then you know what I mean.
I am also an Independent Shaklee Distributor helping others improve their lives.