Taking an Active Role
Raising children is one of the most challenging roles that any man, woman or couple can ever experience in life. Much joy as well as significant heartache can come from being a parent. Being a parent requires patience, nurturing, discipline, support and, most important, love and support.  As our children go through their developmental stages from infants, to toddlers, to teenagers, to young adults and adulthood, the challenges and rewards change.
As our kids get older and alcohol and drugs enter the picture, we are faced with a unique set of challenges that require our focused attention. We cannot simply sit back and hope that our kids will "get through it." As parents, we need to take an active role in learning about alcohol and drugs and in helping our kids to do the same. Clearly, we cannot sit back and just hope.
Parents Play a Key Role:
It is important for you to know that parents play a significant role in preventing and dealing with alcohol and drugs. Fostering healthy and responsible attitudes, talking openly and honestly, encouraging supportive relationships, fostering the development of positive interests and showing children that their opinions and decisions matter, are all ways to help prevent the use of alcohol and drugs.
And, as parents we have far more influence than we think , and talking honestly about alcohol and drugs can have a real impact.  In fact, research has shown that kids who have conversations with their parents and learn a lot about the dangers of alcohol and drug use are 50% less likely to use alcohol and drugs than those who don't have such conversations.
Age Matters - It's Never Too Young To Start:
You have more influence over your kids' attitudes and decisions about alcohol and drugs before they start , than you do afterwards.  Start early!  It's never too early to begin the conversation .
Do you suspect that your child is abusing alcohol or using drugs? Are you worried? Have you noticed some changes with your child? As a parent, it is normal to be concerned. Listen to your intuitive voice and read on!
You are not alone!
Key Question:
Why do some people become addicted to alcohol and drugs and others do not?
Whether a person decides to use alcohol or drugs is a choice, influenced by their environment - peers, family, and availability. But, once a person uses alcohol or drugs, the risk of developing alcoholism or drug dependence is largely influenced by genetics. Alcoholism and drug dependence are not moral issues, are not a matter of choice or a lack of willpower. Plain and simple, some people's bodies respond to the effects of alcohol and drugs differently. Within this section of the NCADD website, we offer valuable information about: