New! Wildest Colts Resources Dr. John Breeding A resource site for parents, and a challenge to the biomedical mental health industry.
This site offers an alternative perspective to the bio-psychiatric industry, and to the millions of psychotropic prescriptions written for children and adults.
We really do have natural, built-in ways of psychological healing. With attention and adequate resource, anyone can reemerge from even the greatest distress and most extreme states of mind.
Wildest Colts Resources. Support for adults in their work with young people, especially in challenging situations. Defense of parents from coercion, and young people from labeling and drugs. (Consider a tax-deductible donation to support this work!)
The recent ruling of the Netherlands Advertisement Code Commission (NACC) concerning the diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be a first step toward exposing in the United States what many experts long have argued is a fraudulent diagnosis.
We investigate and expose psychiatric violations of human rights. From the abuse cases that come through this office we have noticed an increase of children that go into the system being put on mind-altering psychotropic drugs as a rule.  We have introduced legislation to put a stop to this harmful practice.
Medical Fascism in the USA - Courts Order Kids To Take Drugs Parents pressured to put kids on AZT, Ritalin, and other dangerous toxic drugs Can a judge constitutionally order a controversial drug to be given to a child over the opposition of his parents? Parents are medicating their children for fear of having them hauled away by Child Protective Services.
Legal advocacy for the civil rights and human dignity of people with mental disabilities
Peter R. Breggin, M.D.
Psychiatric Drug Facts   What your doctor may not know about:  How psychiatric drugs really work Adverse drug effects on the brain and mind  The role of the FDA  Drug company practices  Recent medical and legal developments  Electroshock and psychosurgery
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder - (Exposing the Fraud of ADD and ADHD) -   ADHDFRAUD.COM  The official website of Fred A. Baughman Jr., MD ( Neurologist, Pediatric Neurology ) Fred Baughman, MD
TREATMENT ADVOCACY CENTER   The Treatment Advocacy Center is a nonprofit organization working to eliminate barriers to treatment of severe mental illness.
Last year JAMA (Journal of the American Medical Association) admitted that doctors are the third leading cause of death in the U.S. Personally, I think the statistics are on the low side. I wouldn't be surprised if they're the leading cause (remember that old saying, "doctors bury their mistakes." And those mistakes often don't make it into the records. I've seen it.)
Pressure to put kids on Ritalin In the war to control children's bodies and minds, some judges, backed by schools, are forcibly drugging kids. Parents are being denied their right to decide to protect their child's health from drugs they believe are unnecessary and dangerous. "Some public schools are accusing parents of child abuse when they balk at giving their kids drugs such as Ritalin, and as judges begin to agree, some parents are medicating their children for fear of having them hauled away." (8/8/00) --USA Today
Just say yes to Ritalin! Increasingly, school officials are threatening parents with the expulsion of their children from classes, or the seizure of kids from the home, if they don't agree to medication with Ritalin. -- Salon
P.S. on ADHD Now another word on Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and the use of Ritalin:      I'd like to thank the hundreds of parents who wrote me detailed letters about how they managed to keep their children off this drug after doctors and teachers recommended it then watched their kids grow up to be healthy and spirited individuals.      To those who disagreed with me, often very vigorously: That's fine. I'm glad you care about your kids and will fight for whatever you believe in. However, the fact remains, this nation is drugging kids to an extreme degree, and major investigations are required to get to the bottom of it.
Nicholas Regush produces medical features for ABCNEWS. In his weekly column, published Wednesdays, he looks at medical trouble spots, heralds innovative achievements and analyzes health trends that may greatly influence our lives. His latest book is The Breaking Point: Understanding Your Potential for Violence; go here to preview his new book, The Virus Within: A Coming Epidemic.
As awareness of the potential dangers of mind-altering drugs increases, state boards of education and state legislatures are making efforts to curb their use. Recent studies show that Ritalin and other psychotropic drugs can cause permanent changes in children's developing brains. Ritalin has been compared to cocaine for its addictive properties by the federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), and the Brookhaven National Laboratory found it to be "more potent than cocaine on the dopamine system," an area of the brain many doctors believe is most affected by these drugs.
When Running on Ritalin was published in 1998 it touched off a firestorm about treating children with psychiatric drugs. Dr. Lawrence Diller established himself as the leading expert on the controversial use of stimulants for attention deficit disorder. In 2000 Diller testified before a U.S. Congressional committee investigating Ritalin use.
Dr. Diller poses in diagnosis and treatment: Have all non-drug approaches been tried? Is the diagnosis accurate? What's known (or unknown) about the recommended drug? Prescribing drugs for children is a risky business. Dr. Diller explains why and offers alternatives to help ease parents' distress.