debate course in wake of drug-fueled death
Nashoba Publishing nashobapublishing.com
Posted: 01/20/2012 07:36:20 AM EST
On Jan. 10, Ayer resident Dan Gleason appealed to the Ayer Board of Selectmen to launch an inquest into the general state of the drug climate in town. The request comes in the wake of the death of a Shirley teen allegedly mugged for drug money which immediately preceded his death when on West Main Street the robbery victim was struck and killed by passing cars when he chased after the two alleged perpetrators. All involved were high-school age students.
Our story prompted much commentary on our website, www.NashobaPublishing.com , about the affair and what could and should be done:
"CMuesel" said: In a town this small, it should be a simple task to identify the dealers. We're not in Lowell or Worcester. We're a community of 7,000 with 16 police officers. That's less than 500 people per officer to review, and it must be easy to boil it down to under 100 suspicious households. It shouldn't have taken a child's death to raise our awareness. Thanks for speaking out Dan, I'm with you 100%.
"Parent in Shirley" responded: I think we need to remember that what happened to Corey Buxton happened because of individuals who do not live in Shirley or Ayer - they were from Fitchburg. Is there a drug problem....YES, will there always be? YES. these drugs do not start here. Know where your kids are and what your kids are doing. Time for parents to parent and be part of their kids lives....know what they are doing and who they
are with.
"Thgm" and "AyerParent" both corrected "Parent in Shirley" - indeed, both of the teens arrested (one an adult, the other a juvenile) reside in Ayer, according to the police.
"Fate 122909" said: I work with kids in this town, they worry about being a "snitch." I wish more parents would focus on raising their kids to be honest, even if it's hard sometimes.
"Parent and teacher" said: The problem doesn't start at the school. The problem starts at HOME.
"Pissed off parent" wrote "part of the trouble for this town starts right up at ayer high. this is because there is a handful of teachers that coddle the "bad kids" and it almost encourages there behavior because they like the attention that is given to them. this school needs some serious readjustment or the town of ayer wont have a high school within the next 5-6 years.
"Pissed off parent" posted again: the football teams incident is shameful but as said as it is, it was brought on by the coaching staff. the coaching staff is a complete joke and sense they treat their team with no respect the players have no respect for the team. they need a new coaching staff in there, to improve the football team, and it will also largely impact the school. ayer has always been given good athletes...
"Thgm" wrote: Living in a small town does not necessarily equal safety and "no drugs". It is a parent's job to check in with their kids, keep tabs on who they hang out with and where they are. Many associated behavior changes go along with drug use and some parents ignore the signs and/or don't think their kid could do drugs.
"Concerned parent" added: This is not about if your child is good or bad. Most of these kids are great kids who make bad decisions. These bad decisions lead into stealing for their next high. The drugs that are at the high school are a lot more than just marijuana, and it is just not the town of Ayer. Kids today are into Oxycontin, and Percocet. A lot of these pills are made without the active ingredients that the drug company ad to them to make them RX safe, the percocets are made without the acetaminophen which gives a much better high. The kids today are crushing the pills to snort, and even injecting the pills. Kids steal anything and trade it for the pills. The kids get addicted and will steal anything, it does not matter if they are your own children. Eventually it is not about getting high, its about taking the drug to curb the side effects because the body needs the drug. Some people don't want to get high, but without the drug they go through very vicious withdrawals. People can get to the point that the pills that they once took get to expensive. An addict can spend hundreds of dollars a day just to keep the side effects away. A lot of people once they reach this point find a cheaper high. They continue to steal, because they need to get their drugs, but can not afford the pill. The cheap drug of choice today is heroin. Heroin is made more available than most people think. It has become an epidemic that is destroying the good kids. Once a child become addicted it is almost impossible to get them help. You can not help the ones who do not want to be helped. It is the most heart breaking thing a parent can go through. Eventually when hooked to heroin, which does not take long at all, people can overdose and die with just one injection of heroin.
There are a lot of bad kids out there, but there is also a lot of great kids who get addicted. I agree something needs to be done, and these kids who steal need to pay the consequences. But instead of saying the problem starts at home look around. Some of these kids who become drug addicts have a great family up bringing, they are star athletes or they have scholarships to college. A kid is going to get addicted to a drug if they choose. Kids know how to say no, some get influenced to try the drug, and it only takes one time to become an addict. There is more drugs in the school systems than people want to admit. It is not just Ayer high school, it is surrounding towns, and it is in the MIDDLE schools as well.
What to be done I am not exactly sure. Getting drug dealers off the street is great, but then one drug dealer gets off the street another one will take there place and become the local dealer. It is not that easy. Be concerned with your own kids and if you suspect any sign of them doing drugs, get them help immediately. I don't care if they deny they do not do drugs, bring them to their doctors and get them drug tested. It all shows up. I waited to long and lost a "great child" who made bad decisions. I was blinded like most, my child never would be an addict.
"Genx12" sparked discussion by writing: FYI With regards to the football/marijuana bus incident, a confession was made by a player, but the administration chose not to believe the student. I bet they believe it now. Sounds like an apology is in order to the football team.
"Bmango" responded: Apology, are you kidding me? The confession was made by a student who was was forced to confess to something he didn't do so that the rest of the team could play. The coaches and administration made the right decision.
"AyerParent" added: That is correct Bmagno. Sorry GenX12, the truth is for the players to tell. Maybe their parents can get them to "man up" instead of asking a "less than star" player to take the heat. Shameful.
"CMeusel" said: I can't control other people's homes or other people's children other than through my vote for those running where my taxes get applied, a public forum voice, or through police involvement. I can keep my kids off drugs and I can teach my kids to be honest. And I will teach my children self defense and how to identify dangerous situations. But I can't keep them from being mugged by others. Saying "the problem starts at home" doesn't address anything, it's a crappy excuse. Some of these kids don't have the benefit of two loving parents, or any loving parents, or a home, which is sad, but a fact. So, we as a community need to lean on our public system to help them become good people. If there's a handful of teachers "coddling bad kids", call them out on it, or show up to the principal's office and demand answers, or ask them why they do it. Being a teacher is a hard job when faced with children that just need someone to love and guide them. Remember back when you were a teen, teenagers are seeking identity, seeking acceptance, and trying to figure out a world that they think they've already conquered. Don't blame the home, or the kids, or the teachers, or the high school... it's not as clean cut as that. Somehow I don't think that the teachers' intentions are to help create "bad people", or create some heroic facade for the other kids and peers. Blame doesn't fix anything, confrontation of a problem and identifying solutions does.
"AyerParent" responded: CMeusel hits the nail on the head. Great post Selectman run?
Welcome to your discussion forum: Sign in with a Disqus account or your social networking account for your comment to be posted immediately, provided it meets the guidelines. ( READ HOW .) Comments made here are the sole responsibility of the person posting them; these comments do not reflect the opinion of Nashoba Publishing. So keep it civil.