Success Stories
News and Events
Click here to read "Addressing the Complexities of Chronic Pain," by Dr. James Gagne, an internist at The Canyon. The article was published in Marin Medicine Magazine . (This link is provided solely for educational purposes.)
Photo Gallery
Talking to Kids About Drugs
Parents may feel uncomfortable talking to their kids and teens about drug use, but it's still one of the best preventatives around.
It's squirm-inducing to most parents: talking to teens and children about drugs. If you feel this way, you're in good company. More than one in five parents feel ill-equipped to prevent kids from trying drugs and alcohol, according to survey data from Partnership for a Drug-Free America and the MetLife Foundation.
Stats on Parents Talking to Teens About Drugs
The new data comes from the 2009 Partnership Attitude Tracking Study (PATS), sponsored by MetLife Foundation, which found more than one in five parents feel there is little they can do to prevent their kids from trying drugs (22 percent) and alcohol (27 percent). The survey also found only two in five parents (39 percent) feel strongly that they could immediately stop their kids from using drugs once they've started. PATS data released earlier this year also confirmed marked increases in teen use of alcohol, Ecstasy and marijuana, namely those substances that teens are most likely to encounter is social situations.
To help motivate and equip parents to talk with their kids about the dangers of substance abuse, the two organizations are focusing the next phase of their award-winning radio campaign on better preparing parents on ways to safeguard their kids from the risks of drug and alcohol use.
Helping Parents Talk to Kids about Drugs
To begin an ongoing conversation, the Partnership and MetLife Foundation's parenting skills campaign will air educational messages on radio stations in local markets nationwide through the end of October 2010. The campaign is backed by online tools and tips for raising drug-free teens.
"It's crucial that we help parents understand the threats facing teens today, help them be more confident about their ability to make a difference, and equip them with useful resources, which is the purpose of this campaign," said Steve Pasierb, president of the Partnership.
"By talking with teens about the dangers of drug and alcohol use, parents can help protect their kids and keep them safe," said Dennis White, president and CEO of MetLife Foundation. "Parents strongly influence the decisions teens make and this campaign provides much-needed tools to help parents feel better equipped to discuss this important health issue with their kids."
Teen Drug Rehab
Considering the age of the average person seeking treatment is getting younger and younger, the program couldn't come a moment too soon. If your teen is in need of teen drug rehab, call The Canyon at our toll-free number. Someone is there to take your call 24 hours a day and answer any questions you have about treatment, financing or insurance.
Call 877.714.1319 If The Canyon isn't right for you, we'll find the place that is.