How We Work
If you are here because you have a phobia, or any sort then understand that you are really not alone. There are many people who have achieved freedom from phobias with us and they range from agoraphobia the fear of open spaces all the way to zoophobia the fear of animals and many other phobias in-between.
One of the most common reasons for people to seek hypnotherapy services is for help in overcoming a phobia. The most common phobias are those such as fear of spiders and fear of flying, which like most phobias are easily cured using hypnotherapy combined with NLP techniques that we have developed to make the cure fast and effective.
We show you how you will easily be able to change the feeling of panic and fear to being calm, confident and in control. Often phobia's if not treated quickly will grow in intensity and take more and more things into account. I wonder if you were to think about your phobia is it getting better over time or worse?
Phobias are often rooted in childhood education and misunderstanding, but equally they can come from a specific incident, or sometimes from nowhere. Phobias are not logical in fact they are quite the opposite.
Lets take a fear of flying as an example. You can explain to someone who has a fear of flying how a plane works, why the wings are supposed and designed to move and bounce as it travels through the air. You can explain that air travel is statistically the safest mode of transport - which when explained with lots of other data is completely logical, but it rarely makes any difference. Armed with this knowledge the person only feels more foolish and useless, which in turn means the phobia takes greater control.
Hypnotherapists often have different approaches to the treatment of phobias and it is important to speak to the therapist you have chosen to check that you are comfortable with them, their approach, and experience.
We believe that therapy should be quick and painless, and not drawn out over session after session.
Lets now take a closer look at how we operate so successfully.
It may seem strange but we really are not that interested in why you have the phobia, actually it does not matter, what we are interested in is how you create the phobia you have and how we will make sure that it is eradicated. In between you arriving and you leaving we will have some fun in getting rid of it, so that you can once and for all take control of your life.
Our aim is that after you leave us when you think about the phobia you have a smile on your face knowing that you are free of it and in control.
Does that sound like it's impossible or that it will not apply to you? If so you are in good company of many of our previous clients who thought just the same way, before they experienced the freedom of being calm confident and in control and free from their issue for life.
If you are ready to experience the same then take action now and call: 0800 0191 366 or 0780 879 25 20 or text us and we will call you. Alternatively just click the link to the right of the page titled "am I ready to"?