Homeschooling: From Burden to Lifestyle Category: Homeschooling In the fall of 1990, our family began to homeschool. At least that's what we thought we were doing. Years later we discovered that what we were really doing was learning how to live. My husband Ray and I had been having serious reservations about public schools. In August we finally made the decision to give homeschooling a try. Our children were going into the first, fourth, and sixth grades. Ray was a minister, so I often had to explain what we were doing. I remember telling people that we would try it for a year and that I didn't think I would ruin them in a year.
The Big Question for Homeschoolers Category: Homeschooling We've all heard it. We tell someone that we're homeschooling our children and that person says, "But what about socialization? Don't you think it's important for kids to be with other kids their own age?" Public school educators often pick up the tune. Faced with irrefutable evidence that homeschoolers do better academically, the educators will say, "But school is not just about academics. Children learn socialization--how to get along with others."
Why I Plan to Train My Children At Home Category: Homeschooling Christ-centered home education is not merely one educational alternative. It is a requirement for believing families. Parents may choose to use other resources to assist them in their task, but they must remember their ultimate responsibility. As for me, I have seen enough of public and private schools to know that I do not want my children in those environments.
Am I Going to Ruin My Children? Category: Homeschooling You lie awake at night asking yourself questions such as, "What will people think?" "What if my child has special needs?" "Can I cover everything?" "Which approach should I take?" "Will my children be ready for college?" "Do I know what I am doing?" and the grand prize winner, "AM I GOING TO RUIN MY CHILDREN?" Feeling overwhelmed? God has given us answers for these fears.