Product Description
Guaranteed to help parents reclaim sweet dreams for their entire family
New from the bestselling author of the classic baby sleep guide!
Getting babies to sleep through the night is one thing; getting willful toddlers and energetic preschoolers to sleep is another problem altogether. Written to help sleep-deprived parents of children ages one to five, The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers offers loving solutions to help this active age-group get the rest they--and their parents--so desperately need.
A follow-up to Elizabeth Pantley's megahit The No-Cry Sleep Solution , this breakthrough guide is written in Pantley's trademark gentle, child-centered style. Parents will discover a wellspring of positive approaches to help their children get to bed, stay in bed, and sleep all night, without having to resort to punishments or other negative and ineffective measures. The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers tackles many common nighttime obstacles, including:
Refusals to go to bed
Night waking and early rising
Reluctance to move out of the crib and into a big-kid bed
Nighttime visits to the parents' bed
Naptime problems
Nightmares, "night terrors," and fears
Special sleep issues of twins, special needs children, and adopted children
Sleepwalking, sleep talking, snoring, and tooth grinding
Product Details
Amazon Sales Rank: #4057 in Books
Published on: 2005-04-25
Original language: English
Number of items: 1
Dimensions: 1.10" h x 5.46" w x 8.24" l, 1.04 pounds
Binding: Paperback
396 pages
Editorial Reviews
From the Back Cover
"A good night's sleep is within reach. Let the great ideas in this book guide you and your child there . . . lovingly." --Harvey Karp, M.D., author of The Happiest Toddler on the Block
Your toddler isn't sleeping through the night. Your preschooler battles bedtime. And you haven't had a good night's sleep in how many years? Get the rest you all desperately need with advice found in The No-Cry Sleep Solution for Toddlers and Preschoolers .
Elizabeth Pantley's beloved parenting classic The No-Cry Sleep Solution has helped hundreds of thousands of parents gently coax their babies to sleep. Now she gives you tools to help your one- to six-year-old child get in bed, stay in bed, and sleep all night by providing no-cry solutions for
Bedtime battles, dawdling, and evening meltdowns
Night waking and early rising
Moving out of the crib and into a big-kid bed
Graduating from the family bed to independent sleep
Ending the all-night breastfeeding routine
Stopping nighttime visits to your bed
Handling naptime problems
Nightmares, separation anxiety, and fears
About the Author
Elizabeth Pantley is the author of the parenting classic The No-Cry Sleep Solution as well as Gentle Baby Care , Perfect Parenting , Hidden Messages , and Kid Cooperation . She is frequently quoted as a parenting expert and is the mother of four great sleepers.