Description: This Web site is a great resource for information on early childhood education, research, policy, early ed. professionals, etc. It also contains news, facts and feedback about current issues.
Description: "What Children Learn in Pre-K" is a 10 minute videotape that tells the stories of five young children who had the opportunity to attend a high-quality pre-kindergarten program. It shows how quality pre-k helps all children prepare for success in school and in life. The video is a great tool to start conversations about expanding pre-k access and raising pre-k quality. Included are suggestions for using this video in your advocacy efforts.
Author: Gilliam, Walter (2 more by this author) Description: This policy brief examines factors associated with expulsion from Prekindergarten (Pre-K). Recent research has explored issues regarding the rate at which preschoolers (children ages three to four) are expelled from Pre-K programs, as well as some of the factors associated with expulsion and the effectiveness of mental health consultation to reduce the classroom behavior problems that may lead to expulsion.
Description: RecognitionandResponse.org is a comprehensive online resource that provides educators with information about this cutting edge approach to early education. This site offers information and resources to help early educators address the needs of young children (3 to 5 year-olds) who show signs that they may not be learning in an expected manner, even before they begin kindergarten.
Author: Reschke, Kathy (8 more by this author) ; Cheryl Barber; Mary F. Longo Description: This publication is part of a series of fact sheets developed for caregivers describing developmental milestones and developmentally appropriate practices when working with three-year olds. The fact sheet also includes tips on working with parents and what to do if you are concerned about a child's development.
Author: Reschke, Kathy (8 more by this author) ; Cheryl Barber; Mary F. Longo Description: This publication is part of a series of fact sheets developed for caregivers describing developmental milestones and developmentally appropriate practices when working with four-year olds. The fact sheet also includes tips on working with parents and what to do if you are concerned about a child's development.
Author: Reschke, Kathy (8 more by this author) ; Cheryl Barber; Mary F. Longo Description: This publication is part of a series of fact sheets developed for caregivers describing developmental milestones and developmentally appropriate practices when working with five-year olds. The fact sheet also includes tips on working with parents and what to do if you are concerned about a child's development.
Description: The Foundation for Early Learning has a Getting School Ready campaign that focuses on what families, early childhood professionals, and schools can do to help children be ready for school and what schools can do to be ready for the incoming children. The suggestions attempt to close the "preparation gap" that too many of our children face. These resource booklets are available in the following languages: English, Spanish, Cambodian, Chinese, Russian, Somali, and Vietnamese. You may download copies or order free copies through this site.
Author: Sawyers, Karen; Janet Hutson-Brandhagen Description: In the article the authors cite research demonstrating the impact of music on the development of reasoning skills instrumental in math problem solving, and provide ideas on how teachers can integrate music and math in their classrooms. "Music is organized in mathematical ways: its melodies, rhythms, and harmonies are built on recurring mathematical patterns and sequences."
Description: The primary objective of the National Early Childhood Transition Center (NECTC) is to investigate and validate practices and strategies that enhance the early childhood transition process and support positive school outcomes for children with disabilities. This website provides families and educators with research and information about successful transitions for children with disabilities. Several materials are available in Spanish.
Author: Buysse, Virginia; Ellen Peisner-Feinber Description: Recognition Response (R&amp;R) is a model of RTI (Response to Intervention) for pre-k developed by researchers at the FPG Child Development Institute. It is designed to enhance teaching practices of language, literacy, and math with three-to-five year olds enrolled in center based early childhood programs.
Description: RecognitionandResponse.org is a comprehensive online resource that provides educators with information about this cutting edge approach to early education. This site offers information and resources to help early educators address the needs of young children (3 to 5 year-olds) who show signs that they may not be learning in an expected manner, even before they begin kindergarten.
Description: A fact sheet on how screen time for young children. Information is included on why children learn best in "real" situations, issues that may develop with overuse of media, and suggestions on how to limit screen time.
Author: Belinda, Christine Description: This family newsletter provides information on sleep and sleep problems in kids. Ahh...sleep...something many of us would like more of. We know sleep is important, but what does sleep mean to healthy child development? Sleep experts have built a strong case for including sleep as an integral part of understanding healthy child development. Additional resources provided with article.
Author: Oesterreich, Lesia (39 more by this author) Description: This fact sheet focuses on guidance with preschoolers. It provides information on how to establish routines and realistic expectations for children and offers suggestions on how to respond to misbehavior. Examples of responses are provided.
Author: Sells, Jill Description: The purpose of this booklet is to provide early education and child care trainers with introductory information about what the Washington State Early Learning and Development Benchmarks are and how they are relevant to your work as a trainer.
Description: This guide is designed to provide information to public school educators and policymakers who are planning or providing educational programs for children ages three to five. It includes short syntheses of research about the characteristics of early education programs that have the most influence on the development of cognition and learning. IIndicators are included that can be used as a self-assessment tool to judge a program’s quality and make plans for improvements or as quality standards to be used during planning. States may find the quality indicators and outcomes useful as they prepare guidance for the operation of early childhood programs.
Author: Capizzano, Jeffery (2 more by this author) ; Gina Adams; Freya Sonenstein Description: This report provides information on child care options for children under five and discusses the variations from state to state.
Author: Sprain, Joan (2 more by this author) Description: This fact sheet defines and explains the term "developmentally appropriate" as it applies to both infant/toddler and preschool child care programs.
Author: Bowman, Barbara; M. Susan Burns; Suzanne Donovan Description: This book discusses the reasons why there are so many preschoolers to be educated, and how all preschools are different. This book identifies that for these centers and preschools to realize the hopes of parents and educators, more attention is needed on their content, quality, and performance.
Author: Kock, Jo Anne (8 more by this author) ; Martin, Sally, Reilly, Jackie, Weigel, Dan; Agao, Vicki, Sigman-Grant, Madeleine; Bixler, Mikki, Papa, Marianne Description: This is a training manual for providing in-service training to child care providers on the topic of physical activities for infants, toddlers, and preschoolers. The activities are aligned with the Nevada Pre-K Standards that have been identified by the state. The manual provides ideas for preparing for the workshop, a script, activity cards, posters, references, resources, pre and post-workshop questionnaire and evaluation instruments.
Author: Gilliam, Walter (2 more by this author) Description: This policy brief examines factors associated with expulsion from Prekindergarten (Pre-K). Recent research has explored issues regarding the rate at which preschoolers (children ages three to four) are expelled from Pre-K programs, as well as some of the factors associated with expulsion and the effectiveness of mental health consultation to reduce the classroom behavior problems that may lead to expulsion.
Author: Bryant, Donna (1 more by this author) ; Donna-Marie Winn; Janis Kupersmidt Description: This study examined the effectiveness of a comprehensive, research-based intervention comprised of a specific set of activities for classroom teachers to use in everyday classroom activities and for mental health consultants to use with parents through group meetings and home visits.
Description: RecognitionandResponse.org is a comprehensive online resource that provides educators with information about this cutting edge approach to early education. This site offers information and resources to help early educators address the needs of young children (3 to 5 year-olds) who show signs that they may not be learning in an expected manner, even before they begin kindergarten.
Author: Stone, Janis (6 more by this author) Description: Preschoolers need clothes that help them become more independent. This fact sheet provides suggestions for parents on helping children select their own clothes and learn decision making.
Description: The SpecialQuest Multimedia Training Library supports the inclusion of young children with disabilities birth-five and their families, in early care and education settings. The SpecialQuest materials and approach have been used with over 5,000 participants nationwide, refined over the past ten years, and have been shown to create and sustain change. SpecialQuest Birth-Five provides these materials at no cost with funding from the Office of Head Start. May be used as professional development or inservice training for staff. Materials include short videos, training scripts and handouts, and other materials for both early childhood programs and home visitation programs. Some are available in Spanish and other languages.
Description: It is often challenging to work with a new child, whose primary language is not English, when integrating them into the classroom environment. This brief describes a common situation and the ways to handle what could be a frustrating situation for both child and teacher.
Author: Kagan, Sharon Lynn (1 more by this author) ; Pia Rebello Britto, Ph.D.; Kristie Kauerz, M.A.; Kate Tarrant, M.P.A. Description: This pdf document shares information on how the Washington Early Learning and Development Benchmarks were developed. The benchmarks are considered a resource for practitioners and professionals in the field of early childhood as they design interactions and curriculum for infants, toddlers, and preschoolers.
Author: Capizzano, Jeffery (2 more by this author) ; Gina Adams; Freya Sonenstein Description: This report provides information on child care options for children under five and discusses the variations from state to state.
Author: Bodrova, Elena (2 more by this author) ; Deborah Leong; Rima Shore Description: This fact sheet provides information on standards for preschool; program standards and child outcome standards. Includes nine keys to effective prekindergarten standards.
Author: Barnett, W. Steven (9 more by this author) ; Karen Schulman; Rima Shore Description: This fact sheet provides information on costs and guidance on comparing the benefits from smaller classes to those costs.
Author: Ackerman, Debra (4 more by this author) ; W. Steven Barnett Description: This fact sheet debunks myths about the benefits of preschool. Examples includes, only disadvantaged children benefit from preschool, children are prepared for school without prekindergarten, and other myths.
Author: Gilliam, Walter (2 more by this author) Description: This policy brief examines factors associated with expulsion from Prekindergarten (Pre-K). Recent research has explored issues regarding the rate at which preschoolers (children ages three to four) are expelled from Pre-K programs, as well as some of the factors associated with expulsion and the effectiveness of mental health consultation to reduce the classroom behavior problems that may lead to expulsion.
Author: Ackerman, Debra (4 more by this author) ; W. Steven Barnett Description: This fact sheet provides information on increasing the effectiveness of preschool programs. Data on what we know and policy recommendations are included.
Author: Laosa, Luis; Pat Ainsworth Description: This fact sheet provides information regarding hispanic children in preschool, participation rates, the impact of participation, and outcomes associated with participation. Recommendations are included.
Author: Bryant, Donna (1 more by this author) ; Donna-Marie Winn; Janis Kupersmidt Description: This study examined the effectiveness of a comprehensive, research-based intervention comprised of a specific set of activities for classroom teachers to use in everyday classroom activities and for mental health consultants to use with parents through group meetings and home visits.
Author: Hustedt, Jason; W. Steven Barnett, Kwanghee Jung, Linda D. Goetze Description: The state of New Mexico funded the National Institute for Early Education Research (NIEER) to carry out a comprehensive evaluation of the New Mexico PreK initiative, beginning in its first year of operation. Established in 2005, New Mexico's state-funded prekindergarten initiative, New Mexico PreK, is one of the most recently started prekindergarten initiatives in the United States and has expanded quickly during the past four years. Findings and recommendations are included in the report.
Author: Barnett, W. Steven (9 more by this author) ; Kirsty Brown; Rima Shore Description: This fact sheet provides information on the debate between universal preschool versus targeted preschool programs that are just for children meeting specific criteria. What we know about the debate and policy recommendations are included.