Sleep Better! A Guide to Improving Sleep for Children with Special Needs By V. Mark Durand, Ph.D.
"It is about time parents had some help with one of the most troublesome challenges of raising a special child. . . . The book is great 혰 easy to read, comprehensive, and offers some real hope." 혰The Family Connection
"An extremely valuable resource. It is comprehensive and readable. Assessments and interventions are detailed in a step-by-step fashion, so they can be easily grasped by even the sleepless parent or careprovider." 혰JASH
When children have recurrent sleep problems, they and their families must deal with negative effects on behavior, mood, social interactions, physical stamina, and performance at school or work. This book offers step-by-step, "how to" instructions for helping children with disabilities get the rest they need. For problems ranging from bedtime tantrums to night waking, parents and caregivers will find a variety of widely tested and easy-to-implement techniques that have already helped hundreds of children with special needs 혰 especially children with autism, Tourette syndrome, and cerebral palsy.
Written by a psychologist who was inspired by many sleepless nights with his own child, this book delivers proven techniques from the author's clinical and personal experience, making it a one-of-a-kind resource for families and professionals.
ORDERING INFO ISBN 1-55766-315-7 Paperback 288 pages / 6 x 9 1998 / $27.95 Stock# 3157
Table of Contents
About the Author Preface Acknowledgments
I. The Nature and Problems of Sleep
1. An Overview of Sleep
How Much Sleep Do We Need?
When Are Owls and Larks Not Birds?
What Is Sleep?
What Is Our Biological Clock?
How Does Our Temperature Affect Sleep?
2. Sleep Problems
How Common Are Sleep Problems?
How Serious Are Sleep Problems?
When Does Sleep Become a Problem?
Common Sleep Problems
Hypersomnia and Narcolepsy
Breathing-Related Sleep Problems
Sleep Schedule Problems
Sleep Terrors
Sleepwalking and Sleeptalking
Periodic Limb Movements
Rhythmic Movement Problems
II. Assessing Sleep Problems
3. Identifying the Sleep Problem
Steps to Understanding the Problem
Sleep Diary
Behavior Log
Sleep Interview
Sleep Habits
Bedtime and Night Waking
Sleep Schedules
Sleep Terrors
Hypersomnia and Narcolepsy
Breathing-Related Difficulties
Sleepwalking and Sleeptalking
Limb Movement and Rhythmic Movement
Anxiety and Depression
Daytime Behavior Problems
Other Causes
III. Strategies for Change
4. Good Sleep Habits
The Good Sleep Habits Checklist
Bedtime Routines
The "Out of Control" Child
Bedtime Routines for Children with Autism
Bedtime Routines for Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder