Dottie's Christian Day Care and Pre-School Rocklin California Preschool
Christian Home Day Care and Preschool, Toddlers and Preschool Age Children. Great year round Christian Preschool Program in a Christian Home Child Care and Pre-School Environment. Caring Learning Preschool Atmosphere preparing children for success!
We are Christian home child care and Pre-School providers serving Rocklin, and Roseville California. We have been in the child care and Preschool business since 1995 and raised our children before that. We provide Christian daycare and Pre-School for children from 18 months to Pre-K or when they enter kindergarten. We have a Christian Preschool atmosphere that is loving and geared for learning and development. We enjoy children and love to help them learn and grow. Go to our Parents Page to see an overview of what the children work on throughout the month.  Go to the Week 1-5 pages to see a detailed example of what children are learning each week.
Our program will give your child the advantage they need when entering kindergarten. In our current economic situation we have kept our rates low and offer a great year round pre-school program and educational learning environment for your child. Please browse our website there is a lot of information about what we do.
Preschool learning program centered around the Christian Bible stories.
Preschool Currently Accepting Children 18 Months and Older.
We Accept Children who are not potty trained in our Preschool.
For More Information about the Preschool or to Set up an Interview Call (916) 203-3995 or Email dotstots@dotstots.com
Full & Part Time Child Care
No Enrolment Fees !!!!
Hours 7:00 AM - 5:30 PM
Full time Preschool and Part time Preschool positions available.
Breakfast, Lunch and Snacks Served
Year Round Christian Pre-School Program
Currently Accepting Children 18 Months and Older in our Preschool
For More Information about the Preschool or o Set up an Interview Call (916) 203-3995 or Email dotstots@dotstots.com
Our philosophy is Exposure we like to expose the children to as much information as we can.  We have a lot of guided activities with the learning process involved in everything we do.  It is not uncommon for children in our care to be able to accomplish the following tasks by the time they are ready to enter kindergarten.
Count to 100 identify numbers by sight 1-30
Know letters by sight and phonic sounds
Begin to read short sentences
Know days of the week and months of the year
Be able to write their name along with many letters and numbers.
Be able to cooperate and participate in centers or task
Show love, respect and concern for friends and their belongings
We provide daily written reports for each child in our care. This report details the child's activities and directed task during the day, the child's interests and progress as well as eating habits, health, and free play activities that your child enjoys.
The parents page gives an example of what your children will be learning and working on at Dottie's Day Care during a month. From the Parents Page you will be able to go to pages Weeks 1-5 to get more detailed example of what your children will be working on each week. Our parents are given a great opportunity to reinforce what their children are learning and be a significant part of the learning process.
If you have additional questions about our Christian Day Care such as prices current openings, or other technical information Go to the contact information page. If you do not find the information you are looking for please send us an email. @ dotstots@dotstots.com
inexpensive Christian Day Care, low cost Christian Day Care, reasonable rates Christian Day Care, low priced Christian Day Care, best priced Christian Day Care, inexpensive Christian Child Care, low cost Christian Child Care, reasonable rates Christian Child Care, low priced Christian Child Care, best priced Christian Child Care, inexpensive Christian Preschool , low cost Christian Preschool, reasonable rates Christian Preschool, low priced Christian Preschool, Christian Preschool, inexpensive Christian Pre-school, low cost Christian Pre-school, reasonable rates Christian Pre-school, low priced Christian Pre-school, best priced Christian Pre-school
If you have additional questions about our Day Care such as prices current openings, or other technical information you may find the answers on the contact information page. If you do not find the information you are looking for please send us an email or fill out the form on the contact information page.
We have developed a learning program centered around the Bible stories. Using the Bible stories, people and events to help children learn letters, numbers, colors and shapes. This also helps children learn the basic principles of kindness, compassion and respect for themselves and others.
We have hands-on project time three days a week where children two and over have the opportunity build and create in a guided environment. The projects are related to the theme of the week based on the Bible story along with a letter of the alphabet, color, shape and/or number of the week.
The children also spend time in task groups or centers. These groups and activities vary day to day. The children may be asked to do an individual task associated with a larger group project or asked to work with other children to accomplish a task as a team. These activities help the children learn how to work together, compromise, communicate, and solve problems as a team.
We also have a writing group for our 3 1/2 to pre-K children.
Project time is for fun and learning through guided activities. The children get a chance to express their creativity through many avenues of art. They build and create with paint, glue, sticks, buttons, felt, foam, paper, and just about anything we can find. This skill development time is essential to strengthen small motor skills, eye hand coordination, reasoning, problem solving and all sensory development. Because the children that we work with are so young all the parts and pieces are pre cut or fashioned in a manner to limit frustration and make the time enjoyable. Below are some sample projects you can see details of on the three project pages.
Writing Group
We also have a writing group for our pre-K children. They learn through hands on practice and guided exercises the basics of writing.
Writing the Letter "R"
In writing group the children use large pencils and at time felt tip pens.   We begin with tracing over circles and lines.   The letter of the week is the letter we focus on writing.   The letter "R" is experienced both in upper case and lower case giving a dotted example to trace and then the child is encouraged to write their very own letter "R".   On this particular example there is a picture of the rainbow ,which begins with the letter we are writing.   After a time of concentrated writing, the group is able to color the picture with crayons, bringing them into a relaxed and confident end to the task.
Writing group brings children who are ready into more extended focus time, teaching them completion of a task in a timely manner, preparing   them for the public or private school system.   They find new challenges and excitement about their new success.
Kids Kuisine From Papa's Kitchen
We serve Breakfast, Lunch and an afternoon Snack. All food is prepared fresh.
We do not use microwave or microwave food for the children in our care.
We enjoy our food and like to prepare things that are nutritious that the kids will like and eat.
During the summer we BBQ on Friday, Chicken Legs, Hot Dogs & Hamburgers.
Our goal is to make meal time a fun and enjoyable social time.
Why Structure
Structure is a major part of our program. We have daily scheduled activities to keep the children active and involved.
We have seen over the years that children thrive in an environment where structure is present and the children know what to expect from day to day. Our schedule is designed to have structured and guided activities and also allow ample time for free play for the development of imagination and creativity.
Hours Of Operation
We are open from 7:00 AM until 5:30 PM Monday through Friday.
Schedules - Our schedules are a basic guideline for our day. We use these to keep us on track and keep the children motivated and active. Our schedules may change from day to day depending on individual and group needs.
Summer Schedule - During our Summer schedule we continue to run full preschool program, including water play in the afternoon. Our schedule may change on a daily basis depending on weather conditions and heat. For example, on days that are to be extremely hot, we will take children for extended outside play right after breakfast and stay inside during the afternoon for free play.
Winter Schedule - During the Winter we have the children outside during scheduled times as much as possible. We usually spend more time inside due to weather. We use a lot of group activities and games to help the children learn colors, numbers, shapes, and develop small motor skills and problem solving skills. Music time also gives an opportunity to have structured movement for the large muscles during those rainy days.
Music Time
Music time is a time when the children get to sing, dance and play many percussion instruments. This time is also used to do some circle time activities using motion and dance to help develop large motor skills. These activities stimulate large muscle groups and teach perception concepts such as right, left, in, out, up, down and turn around. This is a fun creative time for all our children and helps them develop rhythm, appreciation and love for all music. We use standard children's songs as well as Modern pop music, pop Gospel, and Christian rock during music time.
Parents Page is designed for the parents who have children enrolled in our daycare. This provides information on what we are currently working on. We have provided the Bible scriptures from (NIV) Bible that we are working on for the month. You may go to the pages listed below to review scriptures that we will be working on or listen to audio clips provided. We have also provided the letters, numbers, shapes, colors, and principles we will be teaching so parents have the opportunity to reinforce these concepts at home.
Integration The babies in our care are fully involved in our program when they want to be.  We allow them to participate in activities such as music and learning times as they are ready.  They have the opportunity to interact with other children at a young age.  The babies seem to really enjoy the older children.  The older children enjoy playing with and teaching the babies new things it's like they have a little brother or sister.  Our older children have been raised with babies around and are very kind and gentle with the infants.  We allow 4  infants, age 2 years and under, in our care at one time.
Education We have age appropriate toys that help stimulate awareness and sensory growth for infants.  As the children get older we have games and toys that help them with the development of small motor control.  When the babies are ready we work on basic concepts like shapes, colors, numbers and animals with hands on fun activities.  These activities help develop speech and awareness.
Sleeping We have a separate room where the babies sleep based on their schedules.  We accommodate their schedules so they have the opportunity to sleep when they need to and get the rest they require.  We have found that in the child care environment babies become very aware at an early age and do not want to miss out on all the fun.
Eating We ask that parents provide formula for their children and we provide all baby food along with bottles (Avent).  We move children to solid food as they develop a desire and require additional nutrients.  They are monitored very closely while eating to insure they can handle eating solid foods.
We enjoy the babies in our care it is a wonderful and rewarding experience to watch babies develop into toddlers, then preschoolers, and into little men and women. We have had many children come back after they have been in school for a few years and they have become bright lights in our world.
This Page has technical information about the Christian Daycare.
This page has a lot of technical information and is a way for you to contact us to inquire about our services or program.
Rocklin, California
Current Openings
We currently have one opening for a child from two years to pre-K. We will have another opening for a two year old to pre-K child on March 2001. Our next infant openings will be available late August and Early September 2001
We are CPR and First Aid Certified
What you would need to bring
We require that you provide formula.
A change of clothes.
Sleeping blanket that your child is comfortable with.
A familiar sleeping toy or stuffy.
What We provide
Baby bottles.
Baby food.
Breakfast, Lunch, Snack, Juice, Milk.
Wipes & Powder +.
A great place to learn & grow.
Lots of one on one time and T.L.C.
Full Time Child Care Prices
We provide only full time care. We have a flat rate of $120.00 per week.  You can bring your child on a part time basis if you prefer,  however our rate is the same and your child may miss out on some valuable learning time.
License Information
We are licensed by the state of California to run a Home Daycare with a capacity of 14 children. We try to keep our enrollment at 12 children. This consist of 4 children under two years old, considered infants and 8 children from two years to pre-K.
Our License number is : 313603095
Contact Us By Phone
You can contact us by phone at: (916) 624-9565
Contact Us On Line
If you would like to contact us online to inquire about our services, program, set up an interview or request additional information please fill out and submit the form below. You can also contact us any time by E-Mail at: DotsTots@DotsTots.com