About our e-newsletters
Free e-newsletters
Mayo Clinic expertise
We do not share your e-mail address
Housecall, our weekly general-interest e-newsletter, keeps you up to date on a wide variety of health topics with timely, reliable, practical information, recipes, blogs, questions and answers with Mayo Clinic experts and more. Our biweekly topic-specific e-newsletters also include blogs, questions and answers with Mayo Clinic experts, and other useful information that will help you manage your health.
Child sleep: Put preschool bedtime problems to rest
Bedtime shouldn't be a battle. Consider common preschool bedtime problems - and what to do about them. The result could be a good night's sleep for the entire family.
You're past middle-of-the-night feedings and diaper changes, but a good night's sleep is still elusive. Maybe bedtime has turned into a battle of wills, or you're struggling to get your preschooler to stay in his or her bed all night. Worse yet, these bedtime battles might be leaving your child tired and cranky during the day. Consider these simple strategies to put the most common bedtime problems to rest - starting tonight!
The problem: Bedtime is chaotic
The scenario: Your days and nights are booked. You often feel rushed when you put your child to bed.
The solution: Even if you need to rearrange your own schedule, it's important to make bedtime a priority. A predictable, calming bedtime routine is often the key to a good night's sleep.
What's in the bedtime routine is up to you. You might give your child a warm bath, brush his or her teeth, read a few stories and say bedtime prayers. Each night, you might praise your child for a specific accomplishment or describe something that makes you proud of your child. If you play bedtime music, play the same songs every night - and select other tunes for daytime music. Then tuck your child snugly into bed and say good night. Experiment to find what works best for you - but once you settle on a routine, follow the same sequence of events at the same time and in the same order every night.
The problem: Your child doesn't want to go to bed
The scenario: It's bedtime, but your child fusses about going to sleep because he or she doesn't want to miss anything.
The solution: If your child can hear talking, laughing, or sounds from the computer or TV, it's easy to see how he or she would feel left out. To ease the transition to bedtime, keep things quiet during the last hour before bedtime. Keep the TV out of your child's room. Put away noisy games and toys. Turn off the TV, computer and video games throughout the house. Dim the lights. Limit the entire family to quiet activities, such as reading books or doing puzzles. Sleep may be more appealing if everyone slows down before bedtime.
The problem: Your child won't fall asleep alone
The scenario: Your child begs you to stay in the room until he or she falls asleep.
The solution: To encourage your child to fall asleep alone, help him or her feel secure. Start with a calming bedtime routine. Then make sure your child has a favorite comfort object, such as a stuffed animal or blanket, for company. If your child is afraid of the dark, turn on a night light or leave the bedroom door open.
If your child continues to resist, you might promise to check on your child every 10 minutes until he or she falls asleep. During these checkups, praise your child for being so quiet and staying in bed. Remember that you're helping your child learn to fall asleep alone. If you give in and climb into bed with your child, that's what your child will remember - and probably expect the next night.
Splaingard ML. Sleep disturbances. In: McInerny TK, et al. American Academy of Pediatrics Textbook of Pediatric Care. Elk Grove Village, Ill.: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2009:1294.
Owens JA. Behavioral sleep problems in children. http://www.uptodate.com/index. Accessed July 19, 2011.
Paavonen EJ, et al. Sleep quality, duration and behavioral symptoms among 5-6-year-old children. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 2009;18:747.
Garrison MA, et al. Media use and child sleep: The impact of content, timing, and environment. Pediatrics. 2011;128:29.
Meltzer LJ, et al. Sleep in the family. Pediatric Clinics of North America. 2011;58:765.
CC00020 Oct. 6, 2011
© 1998-2012 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved. A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.com," "EmbodyHealth," "Enhance your life," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.