I'm a Master's-level recreation therapist and CTRS. The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) provides for therapeutic recreation for students that can benefit from recreation interventions. I have been working with children, adolescents and students for about 20 years and I have developed some unique approaches to improving a student's ability to learn, especially for those with ADHD. That said, I also provide treatments for adults. Please feel free to share my website with others in your organization. I may be able to help. http://www.ctxguide.com/recreation_therapist.htm Thanks, Bryan McFarland, CTRS M.S. Recreation Therapy
Hiya, im 24, jus been referred to a ADHD specialist for assesment - fingers crossed it wont take long to get my appt!...because as soon as i researched ADHD, my life fell into place and i now dont feel as detached/confused/alienated as i normally do ...is ther any1 on here from the UK?...oh and has any1 got any info on Synaptol - i am trying to get hold of some, but its impossible in the UK and its really dear :/ ...i am starting college in sepember and really dont want to ruin it again!...thankyuu
Important! User-Generated Content
The opinions expressed on ADDConnect are solely those of the user, who may or may not have medical training. These opinions do not represent the opinions of ADDConnect or ADDitude magazine. For more information, see our terms and conditions .
What's New on ADDitudeMag.com
Select State/Province AA AE AP Alabama Alaska Alberta American Samoa Arizona Arkansas British Columbia California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Guam Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Manitoba Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana N.W.T. Nebraska Nevada New Brunswick New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York Newfoundland North Carolina North Dakota Northern Mariana Islands Nova Scotia Nunavut Ohio Oklahoma Ontario Oregon Palau Pennsylvania Prince Edward Island Puerto Rico Quebec Rhode Island Saskatchewan South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virgin Island Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Yukon
Copyright (c) 1998 - 2011 New Hope Media LLC. All rights reserved. Your use of this site is governed by our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . ADDitude does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. The material on this web site is provided for educational purposes only. See additional information . New Hope Media, 39 W. 37th Street, 15th Floor, New York, NY 10018