Alternative Treatment ADHD
Metacognitive Therapy : Here is a Therapy that Just Might Help
There are a number of treatments for ADHD that can help people to focus, increase awareness, and improve performance in day to day living. These include medications, certain natural alternatives like Attend, EEG Biofeedback training, and particular eating programs. But absent from this list has been any form of clinical therapy, such as psychotherapy, as these forms of talking therapies tend to focus on improving people's feelings or insight, rather than teaching particular skills that would improve performance or focus. Read more of the article...
A recent press release from the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) that surprised me. NIMH is funding two research projects on what they term novel and innovative approaches to treating children who have Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), and one of these studies will be focused on EEG Biofeedback training. Read more of the article...
VAXA Attend - ADHD Alternative Homeopathic and Natural
Alternative therapies and natural medicines are powerful alternatives today in the health care field. While each year there are an estimated 350 million visits to medical doctors, there are 420 million annual visits to alternative practitioners. That's 70 million more than visit medical doctors! Read more of the article...
Amino Acids and Diet: Two Recent ADHD Studies
We have long held the opinion that the symptoms of ADHD could be lessened, and perhaps fully treated, by the use of amino acids and the help of specific ADD diets. Now two studies, one from Italy and the other from Norway, give more support for our position that prescription medications, particularly stimulants, are not the only effective ADHD treatments available.
The study from Italy looked at the effectiveness of just one amino acid in a population of ADHD children are well known as poor responders to stimulant treatment - children with Fragile X syndrome and ADHD. Read more of the article...
My son was recently diagnosed with ADHD. We prefered Strattera over the other medications offered. Currently he is taking Strattera, if I wanted to switch him to Attend what would be the best way to do that? I have read over the information you have provided in the site about caffeine, his diet and so on. The Strattera does seem to be working but I want something all natural that won't have side-effects. Thanks!
Hi W
Thanks for writing, and here are my thoughts...
First, there is a lot of wisdom in this saying, "If want you are doing works, don't mess with it -- and if it doesn't work, do something else." Read more of the article...
ADHD and Caffeine: a Treatment Option?
For many years our ADHD diet has promoted the use of moderate amounts of caffeine in the morning, along with a protein drink supplement and the nutraceutical medicine Attend , as a part of the program. Parents have reported success using the program, both with their ADHD children as well as in their own lives.
Caffeine is a mild CNS stimulant that can be used with ADHD children, teens, and adults, if used purposefully and in moderation. All stimulants are vaso-dilators, meaning that they allow the blood vessels to increase in size and increase the blood flow in the brain. One of the primary physiological problems causing ADHD seems to be a lack of blood flow to certain regions of the brain, and stimulants help to improve blood flow and reduce symptoms caused by this problem, at least temporarily. Read more of the article...
Effective Herbal Remedy for ADHD
ADHD is often difficult to treat, and most symptoms of ADHD respond well to stimulant medications. However, we have found that stimulants, and other prescription drugs, are not the only effective interventions for ADHD.
Many families are looking for a natural remedy, or a herbal remedy, for ADHD. After personally performing the clinical studies with dozens of subjects, over an 18 month period, we can tell you that this herbal remedy really is effective!
EEG Biofeedback for Attention Deficit Disorder - ADD ADHD
What is EEG Biofeedback or Neurofeedback Training?
In this form of treatment for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder - ADD ADHD- the subject learns to pay attention to his own brain wave activity, and then apparently learns to change and control his brain wave activity.
The subject is given immediate feedback on just what his brain's activity is like at any given moment through the use of high-speed computers which provide both auditory and visual feedback.
And as parents of ADHD kids we would like to find something that would help, without having to use Schedule II prescription amphetamines or other stimulants to help our ADHD child perform better and have more self-control.
This "ADD ADHD" information is for educational purposes only. These statements contained herein have not been evaluated by the FDA. Recommended products are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease. Consult your physician on adhd or health professional on matters related to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and ADHD treatment. The "ADD ADHD Information Library" provides parents with the practical information that they need to help their child or teen with ADHD.