About ADHD Medications, ADHD Diet, and Alternative Treatments for ADHD
You are here
Alternatives to Ritalin for ADHD
Alternatives to Ritalin are available to families seeking to avoid using prescription stimulant medications for the treatment of ADHD. Our favorites are based on our own years of clinical experience and research, and they include:
Our ADHD Diet and Eating Program - easy to do, doesn't cost much, and helps about 25% of those who do just this one intervention;
Essential Fatty Acid Supplementation - part of our ADHD Diet, but listed separately here. The simplest way to do this is use equal amounts of Flax Seed Oil and Primrose Oil. We no long recommend fish oils.
Attend, Extress, Memorin, or Deprex from VAXA - these are great nutraceutical medicines that can improve ADHD symptoms. Our own research showed that over 70% of those using these products for 30 days or more benefitted greatly from them. What you take depends on the type of ADHD that you have.
EEG Biofeedback or Neurofeedback Training - same thing, different names. Very effective intervention for ADHD and other neurological issues too. But can be very costly depending on the provider, and your insurance coverage.
Look at this chart comparing Ritalin to ATTEND and to EEG Biofeedback treatment...
Ritalin is very effective. Ritalin works somewhat differently in the brain than do the amphetamines like Dexedrine or ADDerall. Ritalin seems to primarily impact on longer term vesicular storage of Dopamine, while amphetamines primarily impact the pool of newly synthesized Dopamine. It also has a different effect on Norepinepherine.
Attend is also effective. It has amino acids, essential fatty acids, phospholipids, homeopathic medicines, and more. It is healthy and effective. And it does not require a prescription, and comes with a no-risk trial policy second to none. It either works - or it is free. More information on the natural remedy ATTEND. Here to order ATTEND from VAXA International.
Eating Program (ADD Diet) for Attention Deficit Disorder
Attend Alternative Treatment for ADHD
newideas.net Get the details about ATTEND for ADHD, a natural homeopathic treatment for attention problems, impulsivity, and hyperactivity in children, teens, and adults. Attend is an over-the-counter remedy that is useful with or without other medic...
This "ADD ADHD" information is for general information, educational, or entertainment purposes only. These statements contained herein have not been evaluated by the FDA, and the disclaimer is that any recommended products are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease. Consult your physician on adhd or health professional on matters related to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and ADHD treatment. The "ADD ADHD Information Library" provides parents with the practical information that they need to help their child or teen with ADHD.