What a tragedy. My condolences to her family & friends. Rest in Peace little angel. Without wishing to pre-judge the circumstances of her death I question how many more before the message gets through that drugs can kill the first time they are used.
What a tragedy. My condolences to her family & friends. Rest in Peace little angel. Without wishing to pre-judge the circumstances of her death I question how many more before the message gets through that drugs can kill the first time they are used. Page the Oracle
Page the Oracle wrote: What a tragedy. My condolences to her family &amp;amp; friends. Rest in Peace little angel. Without wishing to pre-judge the circumstances of her death I question how many more before the message gets through that drugs can kill the first time they are used.
It is a terrible tradegy. Unfortunately I think if the message hasn't got through now it probably never will.
[quote][p][bold]Page the Oracle[/bold] wrote: What a tragedy. My condolences to her family & friends. Rest in Peace little angel. Without wishing to pre-judge the circumstances of her death I question how many more before the message gets through that drugs can kill the first time they are used. [/p][/quote]It is a terrible tradegy. Unfortunately I think if the message hasn't got through now it probably never will. stickman
This is a very sad tragedy, but for all the people that are having a dig because she MAY have taken drugs, it must be remembered that more people die from alcohol (a drug) than all the illegal drugs put together.
This is a very sad tragedy, but for all the people that are having a dig because she MAY have taken drugs, it must be remembered that more people die from alcohol (a drug) than all the illegal drugs put together. Philo Beddoe
Ambulance crews spent several hours trying to save the Davison C of E High School pupil's life but she died at the Royal Sussex County Hospital at about 10pm.
I knew things were bad at the RSCH but why were ambulance crews working on her when she was at the hospital? Sad but not unexpected in East Brighton, Rest in peace poor child
Ambulance crews spent several hours trying to save the Davison C of E High School pupil's life but she died at the Royal Sussex County Hospital at about 10pm. I knew things were bad at the RSCH but why were ambulance crews working on her when she was at the hospital? Sad but not unexpected in East Brighton, Rest in peace poor child Just another Taxpayer
Gabbie was an amazing person and beautiful from the inside out, and somone i knew well. rave in pease babe. I hope other teenages realise what can happen when taking drugs now, and hopefully they will think it through more thurely. And hopful nobody will lose anybody else to drugs. x
Gabbie was an amazing person and beautiful from the inside out, and somone i knew well. rave in pease babe. I hope other teenages realise what can happen when taking drugs now, and hopefully they will think it through more thurely. And hopful nobody will lose anybody else to drugs. x esmepoppy
Tragic. RIP - and let's hope she didn't die in vain i.e I hope it sends a very real message to other teenagers that drugs aren't really that cool - just like playing russian roulette - some are lucky, some are not. Condolences to her family and friends. How sad.
Tragic. RIP - and let's hope she didn't die in vain i.e I hope it sends a very real message to other teenagers that drugs aren't really that cool - just like playing russian roulette - some are lucky, some are not. Condolences to her family and friends. How sad. Barney McGrew
I have known Gabi for many years, she went to school until recently with my daughter, and lived only a few doors away for a long time, They enjoyed singing karaoke songs together. Gabi was a lovely warm hearted teenager, with a bright future in front of her, everything to live for. My heartfelt sympathy to Angie, Karen &amp; family and all her many, many friends at worthing high and davidson, let is be said that giving drugs to a 14 year old would be sinking to a new low even in moulscum, but why add to the family grief by speculating, please please wait untill the facts are known Please do not jump to conclusions until the facts are published let the family come to terms with this terrible event. Thank you gabi for being a little shining light in this sometimes dark world
I have known Gabi for many years, she went to school until recently with my daughter, and lived only a few doors away for a long time, They enjoyed singing karaoke songs together. Gabi was a lovely warm hearted teenager, with a bright future in front of her, everything to live for. My heartfelt sympathy to Angie, Karen & family and all her many, many friends at worthing high and davidson, let is be said that giving drugs to a 14 year old would be sinking to a new low even in moulscum, but why add to the family grief by speculating, please please wait untill the facts are known Please do not jump to conclusions until the facts are published let the family come to terms with this terrible event. Thank you gabi for being a little shining light in this sometimes dark world John Steed
Newspapers and random people need to not talk about things that they don't fully understand. I would be just like the other annoying know-it-alls but this horrible experience has taught me otherwise. It's taught me many things, including we need to savour every moment with our friends, even if we do have stupid arguments and fall-outs. R.I.P Gabi you are so so missed xxx
Newspapers and random people need to not talk about things that they don't fully understand. I would be just like the other annoying know-it-alls but this horrible experience has taught me otherwise. It's taught me many things, including we need to savour every moment with our friends, even if we do have stupid arguments and fall-outs. R.I.P Gabi you are so so missed xxx anonginge
i was friends with gabi for quite a while, and i want the dealers behind bars for life, they have not only destroyed gabi's life but they have destroyed her family and friends lives. the dealers are sick giving a 14! year old girl drugs or anyone for that matter. these people need to be put behind bars because they dont care who they sell to, they dont care who they hurt or who they effects, and they dont care about about what theve done or the reprecusions. and this bit is for the argus to read! if the family asked you very politly for this not to be publisised yet, why could you not respect that? anyway i hope the people behind this get what they desverve!! R.I.P Gabbi we're thinking of you allways...x
i was friends with gabi for quite a while, and i want the dealers behind bars for life, they have not only destroyed gabi's life but they have destroyed her family and friends lives. the dealers are sick giving a 14! year old girl drugs or anyone for that matter. these people need to be put behind bars because they dont care who they sell to, they dont care who they hurt or who they effects, and they dont care about about what theve done or the reprecusions. and this bit is for the argus to read! if the family asked you very politly for this not to be publisised yet, why could you not respect that? anyway i hope the people behind this get what they desverve!! R.I.P Gabbi we're thinking of you allways...x 13ennn
I hope the tributes for Gabbie continue to pour in... to say its not appropriate is awful...She was someones baby, someones child!It doesnt matter how a person dies.......All I know is that my child is sitting at home crying for the loss of someone who touched his heart...RIP Gabbie x x
I hope the tributes for Gabbie continue to pour in... to say its not appropriate is awful...She was someones baby, someones child!It doesnt matter how a person dies.......All I know is that my child is sitting at home crying for the loss of someone who touched his heart...RIP Gabbie x x Nikki taylor
Gabbie was an amazing person. I know for a fact she will be highly missed by many peoplwe. And so what if she took drugs, people shouldn't judge, it didn't make her a bad person at all. RIP babe
Gabbie was an amazing person. I know for a fact she will be highly missed by many peoplwe. And so what if she took drugs, people shouldn't judge, it didn't make her a bad person at all. RIP babe MistyRawr
I suppose it is enevitable that teenagers will experiment with things they are told not to. My own experience of drugs is limited to my good friend, 17 at the time, having a bad acid trip the first time he used it, that has kept him in hospital ever since. Needless to say I have never done any drugs over the 40years since. Hopefully the poor girls' friends will also stay clear of the curse of drugs now for the rest of their lives too.
I suppose it is enevitable that teenagers will experiment with things they are told not to. My own experience of drugs is limited to my good friend, 17 at the time, having a bad acid trip the first time he used it, that has kept him in hospital ever since. Needless to say I have never done any drugs over the 40years since. Hopefully the poor girls' friends will also stay clear of the curse of drugs now for the rest of their lives too. salty_pete
i love gabi so much it feals like just yesterday that we was in london zoo laughing at the fat hippos that got stuck in the mud, the family miss you so much, your the best cousen any one could ask for but i know shell be in heaven looking over us & i know shes gona be the shinyest angel there, heart of gold. RIP Gabrielle Price
i love gabi so much it feals like just yesterday that we was in london zoo laughing at the fat hippos that got stuck in the mud, the family miss you so much, your the best cousen any one could ask for but i know shell be in heaven looking over us & i know shes gona be the shinyest angel there, heart of gold. RIP Gabrielle Price jade-price
gabbiiee babe u were like my lil sis and u invited me with you that night and i couldnt go i wish i was there for you babe ur missed at school and we had an assemberly for you on monday but i didnt go to school cos i need to get over the shock. when i found out on the night i couldnt belive it and i truely thought some one was playing a trick and so did themates of ours that i told but when it hit us it hit us bad :'( rest in peace baby girl will be looking at our pics forever and i hope to see u again ur in a better place now and im glad we were friends xxx
gabbiiee babe u were like my lil sis and u invited me with you that night and i couldnt go i wish i was there for you babe ur missed at school and we had an assemberly for you on monday but i didnt go to school cos i need to get over the shock. when i found out on the night i couldnt belive it and i truely thought some one was playing a trick and so did themates of ours that i told but when it hit us it hit us bad :'( rest in peace baby girl will be looking at our pics forever and i hope to see u again ur in a better place now and im glad we were friends xxx emilyelektro123
This is a very sad story, and terrible news for her friends and family. . However, I think everyone should stop making usumptions based on some very poor reporting. . Once a post mortem is done and made public, we will know for shure what killed her, and then we all can make our feelings known based on fact.
This is a very sad story, and terrible news for her friends and family. . However, I think everyone should stop making usumptions based on some very poor reporting. . Once a post mortem is done and made public, we will know for shure what killed her, and then we all can make our feelings known based on fact. Hovesage
Barney McGrew wrote: Tragic. RIP - and let's hope she didn't die in vain i.e I hope it sends a very real message to other teenagers that drugs aren't really that cool - just like playing russian roulette - some are lucky, some are not. Condolences to her family and friends. How sad.
Sends a message.. I dont think so, never has never will, all teanagers are immortal and this sort of thing always happens to someone else....
[quote][p][bold]Barney McGrew[/bold] wrote: Tragic. RIP - and let's hope she didn't die in vain i.e I hope it sends a very real message to other teenagers that drugs aren't really that cool - just like playing russian roulette - some are lucky, some are not. Condolences to her family and friends. How sad.[/p][/quote]Sends a message.. I dont think so, never has never will, all teanagers are immortal and this sort of thing always happens to someone else.... Just another Taxpayer
Page the Oracle wrote: What a tragedy. My condolences to her family &amp;amp; friends. Rest in Peace little angel. Without wishing to pre-judge the circumstances of her death I question how many more before the message gets through that drugs can kill the first time they are used.
so can cars! So could a curry for that matter!
[quote][p][bold]Page the Oracle[/bold] wrote: What a tragedy. My condolences to her family & friends. Rest in Peace little angel. Without wishing to pre-judge the circumstances of her death I question how many more before the message gets through that drugs can kill the first time they are used. [/p][/quote]so can cars! So could a curry for that matter! Tetsugaku-San
my daughter goes to davisons , I have made her read this story and comments, she is 13. it is so sad a tragic , but Gabi was a child , she shouldnt of taken any drugs and whoever gave them to her should be strung up , as parents we need to be brutal about drugs and alcohol to our children.. they kill end of... but what an awful shame that this happened
my daughter goes to davisons , I have made her read this story and comments, she is 13. it is so sad a tragic , but Gabi was a child , she shouldnt of taken any drugs and whoever gave them to her should be strung up , as parents we need to be brutal about drugs and alcohol to our children.. they kill end of... but what an awful shame that this happened Jay-kay
John Steed wrote: I have known Gabi for many years, she went to school until recently with my daughter, and lived only a few doors away for a long time, They enjoyed singing karaoke songs together. Gabi was a lovely warm hearted teenager, with a bright future in front of her, everything to live for. My heartfelt sympathy to Angie, Karen &amp;amp; family and all her many, many friends at worthing high and davidson, let is be said that giving drugs to a 14 year old would be sinking to a new low even in moulscum, but why add to the family grief by speculating, please please wait untill the facts are known Please do not jump to conclusions until the facts are published let the family come to terms with this terrible event. Thank you gabi for being a little shining light in this sometimes dark world
Well said, Mr Steed. Well said.
[quote][p][bold]John Steed[/bold] wrote: I have known Gabi for many years, she went to school until recently with my daughter, and lived only a few doors away for a long time, They enjoyed singing karaoke songs together. Gabi was a lovely warm hearted teenager, with a bright future in front of her, everything to live for. My heartfelt sympathy to Angie, Karen & family and all her many, many friends at worthing high and davidson, let is be said that giving drugs to a 14 year old would be sinking to a new low even in moulscum, but why add to the family grief by speculating, please please wait untill the facts are known Please do not jump to conclusions until the facts are published let the family come to terms with this terrible event. Thank you gabi for being a little shining light in this sometimes dark world [/p][/quote]Well said, Mr Steed. Well said. Peacehaven Paul
anonginge wrote: Ands also, to people like 'davy boy', shut your mouth, no one's to blame. And aren't people from Worthing allowed to know people from Brighton?? jesus...
yes, someone is to blame. the people who brought drugs, whatever type, to a kids party. looking at the evidence provided, a 39-year-old woman and a 17-year-old male are to blame. they have been bailed to allow further enquiries to be made, but the police have suspicions. yes, of course people from other areas know each other, but did her parents know what sort of party she was going to? kids should know better than to try substances they know nothing about. it is really sad this has happened, and i hope it hits home to all other teenagers that drugs, including alcohol, can kill.
[quote][p][bold]anonginge[/bold] wrote: Ands also, to people like 'davy boy', shut your mouth, no one's to blame. And aren't people from Worthing allowed to know people from Brighton?? jesus...[/p][/quote]yes, someone is to blame. the people who brought drugs, whatever type, to a kids party. looking at the evidence provided, a 39-year-old woman and a 17-year-old male are to blame. they have been bailed to allow further enquiries to be made, but the police have suspicions. yes, of course people from other areas know each other, but did her parents know what sort of party she was going to? kids should know better than to try substances they know nothing about. it is really sad this has happened, and i hope it hits home to all other teenagers that drugs, including alcohol, can kill. davyboy
its not for suree if she did die from drugs. and still even if it is from drugs, gabbie was a lovely girl, and shes will be missed so much by friends and family. some people should have some respect, rest in peace gorgeous (L)
its not for suree if she did die from drugs. and still even if it is from drugs, gabbie was a lovely girl, and shes will be missed so much by friends and family. some people should have some respect, rest in peace gorgeous (L) Sophie murray
the people being disrespectiful need to reliase no-one's perfect and theres always abit of bad in good. thats obviously what happened here, Gabi was a lovely girl, with a loving family. and i think people need to respect the family and relise gabi's friends and family are reading these, rest in peace gabi, your missed by so many already xxx
the people being disrespectiful need to reliase no-one's perfect and theres always abit of bad in good. thats obviously what happened here, Gabi was a lovely girl, with a loving family. and i think people need to respect the family and relise gabi's friends and family are reading these, rest in peace gabi, your missed by so many already xxx Sophie murray
gabi was such a lovely girl and i used to be really close with her. when i found out on sunday i was in shock, it was so out of the blue. whether she took drugs or not shouldn't matter, it's happened now hasn't it, noone can do anything about it now. sure she shouldn't have been given them, but don't you think if this could have been prevented by anyone, they would have tried? the article says itself "Leave your tributes to Gabi below". TRIBUTES. not your critisisms of her lifestyle or anything. so many people have been affected by this, whether they knew her or not. i count myself lucky to have known her whilst she was a alive, because like i said before, she was a genuinely lovely girl, and the times i spent with her i will have to cherish forever, because i know they're never going to come again. love you gabi, rest in peace babyyy ♥ xxx
gabi was such a lovely girl and i used to be really close with her. when i found out on sunday i was in shock, it was so out of the blue. whether she took drugs or not shouldn't matter, it's happened now hasn't it, noone can do anything about it now. sure she shouldn't have been given them, but don't you think if this could have been prevented by anyone, they would have tried? the article says itself "Leave your tributes to Gabi below". TRIBUTES. not your critisisms of her lifestyle or anything. so many people have been affected by this, whether they knew her or not. i count myself lucky to have known her whilst she was a alive, because like i said before, she was a genuinely lovely girl, and the times i spent with her i will have to cherish forever, because i know they're never going to come again. love you gabi, rest in peace babyyy ♥ xxx ohaiiiiiii
people should chill out. she's dead and all your doing is arguing, where's the respect. i knew her, i hung out with her and for a while was quite close to her. she was an amazing girl. so what, what ever happened its over now. you people should just pay your respects and let her family and friends grieve. And as for the media releasing this information, no one has any respect for them their just vultures looking for a mistake in someone life, their bullies in a every way. Rest In peace Gabi. Xx you will never be forgotten.
people should chill out. she's dead and all your doing is arguing, where's the respect. i knew her, i hung out with her and for a while was quite close to her. she was an amazing girl. so what, what ever happened its over now. you people should just pay your respects and let her family and friends grieve. And as for the media releasing this information, no one has any respect for them their just vultures looking for a mistake in someone life, their bullies in a every way. Rest In peace Gabi. Xx you will never be forgotten. CEJM100
when will B%H get its act together and realise that drugs kill kids !!!!. I am sick to death of comments from people about alcohol etc, yes it does also damage them, but one little blue tablet can kill them, This was a 14 year old girl, who was given something, that she should not have taken, but she did, and now her poor friends and family are living a nightmare... For too long B@H council have turned a blind eye to drugs in this town, they allow them to roam our streets , and drain our resources. Its about time they did what us as council tax payers demand.. CLean up the streets, get drug pushers into jail., and have no tolerance for these evil child killers.. From a mum, who has been to hell and back , with her kids, so i know what i am talking about
when will B%H get its act together and realise that drugs kill kids !!!!. I am sick to death of comments from people about alcohol etc, yes it does also damage them, but one little blue tablet can kill them, This was a 14 year old girl, who was given something, that she should not have taken, but she did, and now her poor friends and family are living a nightmare... For too long B@H council have turned a blind eye to drugs in this town, they allow them to roam our streets , and drain our resources. Its about time they did what us as council tax payers demand.. CLean up the streets, get drug pushers into jail., and have no tolerance for these evil child killers.. From a mum, who has been to hell and back , with her kids, so i know what i am talking about kathy51
I have known Gabi & her family for many years & she was the sweetest, kindest, funniest girl with the prettiest smile. I feel it is completely disrespectful for a local paper to print a story based on the worst speculation without knowing the facts. This is a hard & horrific time for Gabi's family which is being made worse by rumours which sell papers. Perhaps the editor would think twice if they read something awful like this about a child in their family.
I have known Gabi & her family for many years & she was the sweetest, kindest, funniest girl with the prettiest smile. I feel it is completely disrespectful for a local paper to print a story based on the worst speculation without knowing the facts. This is a hard & horrific time for Gabi's family which is being made worse by rumours which sell papers. Perhaps the editor would think twice if they read something awful like this about a child in their family. Emma May
cheezburger i dont care if the spelling is rubbish thats the truth you are just hurting the family and friends you opinions are fair but the family and friends dont need them right now, this is a place to put tributes not arguments so the last thing im going to say is Gabbi was a lovely girl and a good friend she would do anything for a friend in need
R.I.P Gabbi xxx
cheezburger i dont care if the spelling is rubbish thats the truth you are just hurting the family and friends you opinions are fair but the family and friends dont need them right now, this is a place to put tributes not arguments so the last thing im going to say is Gabbi was a lovely girl and a good friend she would do anything for a friend in need so R.I.P Gabbi xxx 13ennn
kathy51 wrote: when will B%H get its act together and realise that drugs kill kids !!!!. I am sick to death of comments from people about alcohol etc, yes it does also damage them, but one little blue tablet can kill them, This was a 14 year old girl, who was given something, that she should not have taken, but she did, and now her poor friends and family are living a nightmare... For too long B@H council have turned a blind eye to drugs in this town, they allow them to roam our streets , and drain our resources. Its about time they did what us as council tax payers demand.. CLean up the streets, get drug pushers into jail., and have no tolerance for these evil child killers.. From a mum, who has been to hell and back , with her kids, so i know what i am talking about
And I am sick to death of people thinking alcohol is not a drug that can kill the first time you take it, yes it can as has been proved over and over again, the problem isn't necessarily the drugs but what drug dealers mix with the drugs to maximise their profit, maybe one answer is for the government to legalise drugs, at least then people that want to take drugs will know the quality is O.K., I know kids aren't supposed to drink and take drugs, but it's an unfortunate fact of life they do and will always do, so surely it is better if they at least get safe gear, all I can say is I will not judge the young girl that died, and my she R.I.P!.
[quote][p][bold]kathy51[/bold] wrote: when will B%H get its act together and realise that drugs kill kids !!!!. I am sick to death of comments from people about alcohol etc, yes it does also damage them, but one little blue tablet can kill them, This was a 14 year old girl, who was given something, that she should not have taken, but she did, and now her poor friends and family are living a nightmare... For too long B@H council have turned a blind eye to drugs in this town, they allow them to roam our streets , and drain our resources. Its about time they did what us as council tax payers demand.. CLean up the streets, get drug pushers into jail., and have no tolerance for these evil child killers.. From a mum, who has been to hell and back , with her kids, so i know what i am talking about[/p][/quote]And I am sick to death of people thinking alcohol is not a drug that can kill the first time you take it, yes it can as has been proved over and over again, the problem isn't necessarily the drugs but what drug dealers mix with the drugs to maximise their profit, maybe one answer is for the government to legalise drugs, at least then people that want to take drugs will know the quality is O.K., I know kids aren't supposed to drink and take drugs, but it's an unfortunate fact of life they do and will always do, so surely it is better if they at least get safe gear, all I can say is I will not judge the young girl that died, and my she R.I.P!. Philo Beddoe
i cant believe what everyone is saying about this young girl.i was at the hospital on saturday when she was bought in and without knowing at the time what had happened,the look on the girls family nd friends is something which i will never forget.to me and everyone else we should just think that she is just a child and having a child of that age myself know that they can be vulnerable to anything makes it that must more worse and upsetting.
i cant believe what everyone is saying about this young girl.i was at the hospital on saturday when she was bought in and without knowing at the time what had happened,the look on the girls family nd friends is something which i will never forget.to me and everyone else we should just think that she is just a child and having a child of that age myself know that they can be vulnerable to anything makes it that must more worse and upsetting. tiilly
I met Gabi a couple of months ago and had been spending time with her ever since. She was a kind fun loving girl who just wanted to make friends with everyone. Although i wish this had not happened to her i hope she did not die in vein. I hope and prey that people will think twice before they risk their lives taking drugs. Although her death could have been due to natural causes i do not believe that the intake of drugs helped. I urge people to research methadrone otherwise known as 'miaow' or 'm-cat' as i believe this still legal drug (only because it has not been properly tested) is a huge danger to all substance misusers. Originally a plant food it has been banned in several other countries as it has caused many deaths. It is a cheap drug, easy to get hold of and highly addictive. So why is the goverment not testing it and making it illegal even after a girl was paralized from the neck down as a result of taking it and others have died. It can be brought over the internet ffs! It is a very popular drug and i know for a fact that Gabi had taken it in the past. I will admit to 'experimenting' in the past however the obsession caused by the introduction of methadrone to the UK by drug dealers really opened my eyes and i will never go back to it. It was obvious that something tragic was going to happen to someone soon as so many were taking the drug, i just wish it had not happened Gabi. Although i am not ruling out her death being of natural causes as she did feel unwell the day before with a shortness of breath and flu like symtoms, i hope people open their eyes after this tragic and devistating loss. My condolences to her parents and i hope this comment has not upset them in anyway. I am so devistated about her death, i dont think it has sunk in yet and im so so sorry that i was not there to help her when it happened. Much love Gabi, we all miss you so so much. Rest in peace xxx i also hope that the people who dont know the facts dont comment about things they dont know.
I met Gabi a couple of months ago and had been spending time with her ever since. She was a kind fun loving girl who just wanted to make friends with everyone. Although i wish this had not happened to her i hope she did not die in vein. I hope and prey that people will think twice before they risk their lives taking drugs. Although her death could have been due to natural causes i do not believe that the intake of drugs helped. I urge people to research methadrone otherwise known as 'miaow' or 'm-cat' as i believe this still legal drug (only because it has not been properly tested) is a huge danger to all substance misusers. Originally a plant food it has been banned in several other countries as it has caused many deaths. It is a cheap drug, easy to get hold of and highly addictive. So why is the goverment not testing it and making it illegal even after a girl was paralized from the neck down as a result of taking it and others have died. It can be brought over the internet ffs! It is a very popular drug and i know for a fact that Gabi had taken it in the past. I will admit to 'experimenting' in the past however the obsession caused by the introduction of methadrone to the UK by drug dealers really opened my eyes and i will never go back to it. It was obvious that something tragic was going to happen to someone soon as so many were taking the drug, i just wish it had not happened Gabi. Although i am not ruling out her death being of natural causes as she did feel unwell the day before with a shortness of breath and flu like symtoms, i hope people open their eyes after this tragic and devistating loss. My condolences to her parents and i hope this comment has not upset them in anyway. I am so devistated about her death, i dont think it has sunk in yet and im so so sorry that i was not there to help her when it happened. Much love Gabi, we all miss you so so much. Rest in peace xxx i also hope that the people who dont know the facts dont comment about things they dont know. jessi_55
Firstly kids and thats all she was. will always experement wheather it be drink drugs sex solvent abuse etc.But the filth that peddle drugs to young children deserve the death penalty and i for one would pull the leaver with out batting an eyelid and would pay for the privilege of doing so.I personally know members of the family and as it says pay tributes. RIP Young Gabbie And condolences to family and friends
Firstly kids and thats all she was. will always experement wheather it be drink drugs sex solvent abuse etc.But the filth that peddle drugs to young children deserve the death penalty and i for one would pull the leaver with out batting an eyelid and would pay for the privilege of doing so.I personally know members of the family and as it says pay tributes. RIP Young Gabbie And condolences to family and friends DMBE13
Emma May wrote: I have known Gabi &amp;amp; her family for many years &amp;amp; she was the sweetest, kindest, funniest girl with the prettiest smile. I feel it is completely disrespectful for a local paper to print a story based on the worst speculation without knowing the facts. This is a hard &amp;amp; horrific time for Gabi's family which is being made worse by rumours which sell papers. Perhaps the editor would think twice if they read something awful like this about a child in their family.
same her mum and nan lovelyist people you could meet love her and her family and friends
[quote][p][bold]Emma May[/bold] wrote: I have known Gabi & her family for many years & she was the sweetest, kindest, funniest girl with the prettiest smile. I feel it is completely disrespectful for a local paper to print a story based on the worst speculation without knowing the facts. This is a hard & horrific time for Gabi's family which is being made worse by rumours which sell papers. Perhaps the editor would think twice if they read something awful like this about a child in their family.[/p][/quote]same her mum and nan lovelyist people you could meet love her and her family and friends emilyelektro123
MistyRawr wrote: Gabbie was an amazing person. I know for a fact she will be highly missed by many peoplwe. And so what if she took drugs, people shouldn't judge, it didn't make her a bad person at all. RIP babe
Yep she did drugs, so what? Well it killed her, theres your so what. No one said it made her a bad person. Unfortunately it made her a dead person. You sound like an idiot.
Cheezburger...is it me or do you just like disrespecting every teenager that loses their life? You critisised Aaron Pauls mum, and to the fact Aaron was my best friend I found this extremely disrespectful! It seems that you just can't let anything lie, a young girl dies possibly of drugs and all you can do is critisise her and pretty much just say oh well shes dead. I'm not being funny or anything but I think that if this was a relative to you and someone was saying this about your relative you wouldnt be so b****y careless and heartless about the situation! To be honest I think you would be devastated and fuming as well as extremely upset that someone is critisising the death of your relative. The only person that sounds like an idiot is you because it seems you have nothing better to do than go through the all these different stories and upset the relatives and friends and just general public more by critisising the death of young teens and I expect others in the community. For example you critisised Aarons mum when she was clearly pointing out Aarons faults and unlike some people on grieving who unfortunately do automatically pin the blame on the driver and not think of the faults of the friend/relative.
You need to think long and hard about the pain and hurt you are causing the friends and relatives of young Gabbie, how would you feel knowing that this year you wouldn't be spending Christmas with your child/mum/dad/brothe r/etc. knowing that you will never see them again. It hurts really bad, I'm still grieving over the death of Aaron. I think you will never EVER grow to know what its like to actually CARE about sensative subjects such as this until you lose one of the most important people in your life.
My condolenscences to Gabbies family and friends.
x x x
[quote][p][bold]cheezburger[/bold] wrote: [quote][p][bold]MistyRawr[/bold] wrote: Gabbie was an amazing person. I know for a fact she will be highly missed by many peoplwe. And so what if she took drugs, people shouldn't judge, it didn't make her a bad person at all. RIP babe[/p][/quote]Yep she did drugs, so what? Well it killed her, theres your so what. No one said it made her a bad person. Unfortunately it made her a dead person. You sound like an idiot.[/p][/quote]Cheezburger...is it me or do you just like disrespecting every teenager that loses their life? You critisised Aaron Pauls mum, and to the fact Aaron was my best friend I found this extremely disrespectful! It seems that you just can't let anything lie, a young girl dies possibly of drugs and all you can do is critisise her and pretty much just say oh well shes dead. I'm not being funny or anything but I think that if this was a relative to you and someone was saying this about your relative you wouldnt be so b****y careless and heartless about the situation! To be honest I think you would be devastated and fuming as well as extremely upset that someone is critisising the death of your relative. The only person that sounds like an idiot is you because it seems you have nothing better to do than go through the all these different stories and upset the relatives and friends and just general public more by critisising the death of young teens and I expect others in the community. For example you critisised Aarons mum when she was clearly pointing out Aarons faults and unlike some people on grieving who unfortunately do automatically pin the blame on the driver and not think of the faults of the friend/relative. You need to think long and hard about the pain and hurt you are causing the friends and relatives of young Gabbie, how would you feel knowing that this year you wouldn't be spending Christmas with your child/mum/dad/brothe r/etc. knowing that you will never see them again. It hurts really bad, I'm still grieving over the death of Aaron. I think you will never EVER grow to know what its like to actually CARE about sensative subjects such as this until you lose one of the most important people in your life. My condolenscences to Gabbies family and friends. x x x loulabelle333
wondering why moulsecoombe is to blame here ?, gabrielle from worthing, boy bailed from hove, the party was a young boys. why is a 14 year old girl so far away from home ?? mine wouldnt be. it is awful and unbearable for her family and justice must be done, i didnt know anything about m cat until today and thought i was clued up on these things, i hope there is a murder charge for eveyone responsible for this girl being allowed to obtain and take the drugs. dont judge everyone in this area as being the same, the small minority spoil it for everyone else.
wondering why moulsecoombe is to blame here ?, gabrielle from worthing, boy bailed from hove, the party was a young boys. why is a 14 year old girl so far away from home ?? mine wouldnt be. it is awful and unbearable for her family and justice must be done, i didnt know anything about m cat until today and thought i was clued up on these things, i hope there is a murder charge for eveyone responsible for this girl being allowed to obtain and take the drugs. dont judge everyone in this area as being the same, the small minority spoil it for everyone else. just-a-person
i didnt know gabby but i know the 2 arrested and have spent many a night in the adress pictured and i know that she died because she took a "legal" drug known as meow with the chemical name 4-methylmethcathinon e which is actually unclassified as it hit the streets earlier this year and can be bought online, which is an outrage. someone allready died up north from this drug, i have taken it but never again... how many deaths until the law gets set on this drug... and its not like she took loads of this stuff, my eye witness friends say she took 1 small line of it, less than the standard dose. if 1 line can kill someone, they should sort this **** out. personally im annoyed that this stuff is still technically legal and that 2 people i know really well are going down for probably years...
i didnt know gabby but i know the 2 arrested and have spent many a night in the adress pictured and i know that she died because she took a "legal" drug known as meow with the chemical name 4-methylmethcathinon e which is actually unclassified as it hit the streets earlier this year and can be bought online, which is an outrage. someone allready died up north from this drug, i have taken it but never again... how many deaths until the law gets set on this drug... and its not like she took loads of this stuff, my eye witness friends say she took 1 small line of it, less than the standard dose. if 1 line can kill someone, they should sort this **** out. personally im annoyed that this stuff is still technically legal and that 2 people i know really well are going down for probably years... hapablab
first off im 15 years old, and the only people involved that i didnt know was the girl herself, but i can tell you that these are nice people, we sit around smoking a bit of dope, playing playstation watching rubbish tv and stuff, yet you call us scum. but then again, at least 20-25% of all the under18 year olds i know, like the people i go to school with, who do NOT take drugs go out drinking in the streets and on the beach every friday and saturday night, vomiting, getting paraletic filling up emergency wards, vandalising the town and being very antisocial, yet this is ok? we cause no harm to the comunity by sitting around at the weekends, and we're the scum? explain please.
first off im 15 years old, and the only people involved that i didnt know was the girl herself, but i can tell you that these are nice people, we sit around smoking a bit of dope, playing playstation watching rubbish tv and stuff, yet you call us scum. but then again, at least 20-25% of all the under18 year olds i know, like the people i go to school with, who do NOT take drugs go out drinking in the streets and on the beach every friday and saturday night, vomiting, getting paraletic filling up emergency wards, vandalising the town and being very antisocial, yet this is ok? we cause no harm to the comunity by sitting around at the weekends, and we're the scum? explain please. hapablab
legal or not surely your morals would tell you not to give or let a 14 year old take this ? do you think you should have had a moral duty to highlight what was going on at this address to someone ? i would like them to face this girls parents it is wrong and disgusting they didnt think of this and now its too late
legal or not surely your morals would tell you not to give or let a 14 year old take this ? do you think you should have had a moral duty to highlight what was going on at this address to someone ? i would like them to face this girls parents it is wrong and disgusting they didnt think of this and now its too late just-a-person
that says it all, you are 15 years old, you stupid stupid child. you think its ok to sit smoking dope ? and the adult in a house is allowing this ? i rest my case. i try to bring my children up the right way yet there are scumbags who think its ok to get or let my child touch the stuff ? spend a day with me then you will understand that smoking puff weed skunk and having sociable weekend drugs are not ok. it wrecks lives, damages childhoods and screws your mind up beyond belief. it is not big and not clever and that adult should be charged with murder, at 39 she should no better
that says it all, you are 15 years old, you stupid stupid child. you think its ok to sit smoking dope ? and the adult in a house is allowing this ? i rest my case. i try to bring my children up the right way yet there are scumbags who think its ok to get or let my child touch the stuff ? spend a day with me then you will understand that smoking puff weed skunk and having sociable weekend drugs are not ok. it wrecks lives, damages childhoods and screws your mind up beyond belief. it is not big and not clever and that adult should be charged with murder, at 39 she should no better just-a-person
i'm sorry but what the hell is wrong with some of you people . you are debating over different aspects of how you think she died , calling her scum , do you not have any respect for her family or friends , can you not just let them morn in peace. i was a friend of her's and it makes me feel horrible that you are saying things like this about her , so imagine how her family feel . R.I.P gabi x you may be gone , but you will never be forgotten xx
i'm sorry but what the hell is wrong with some of you people . you are debating over different aspects of how you think she died , calling her scum , do you not have any respect for her family or friends , can you not just let them morn in peace. i was a friend of her's and it makes me feel horrible that you are saying things like this about her , so imagine how her family feel . R.I.P gabi x you may be gone , but you will never be forgotten xx kmgkmg123
not calling her scum, angry as a mum how i would feel if this was my daughter. kids do things its a learning curve, adults should no better and protect them, had they done this gabrielle would still be here. to all of her friends let this be your lesson and learn from this and im sure that would make gabrielle proud. every time you are tempted think of her, make her proud and show her family she didnt die in vain, its to late for gabrielle but its not too late for the rst of you, life is precious and short make something of it and think of gabrielle each day
not calling her scum, angry as a mum how i would feel if this was my daughter. kids do things its a learning curve, adults should no better and protect them, had they done this gabrielle would still be here. to all of her friends let this be your lesson and learn from this and im sure that would make gabrielle proud. every time you are tempted think of her, make her proud and show her family she didnt die in vain, its to late for gabrielle but its not too late for the rst of you, life is precious and short make something of it and think of gabrielle each day just-a-person
hapablab wrote: first off im 15 years old, and the only people involved that i didnt know was the girl herself, but i can tell you that these are nice people, we sit around smoking a bit of dope, playing playstation watching rubbish tv and stuff, yet you call us scum. but then again, at least 20-25% of all the under18 year olds i know, like the people i go to school with, who do NOT take drugs go out drinking in the streets and on the beach every friday and saturday night, vomiting, getting paraletic filling up emergency wards, vandalising the town and being very antisocial, yet this is ok? we cause no harm to the comunity by sitting around at the weekends, and we're the scum? explain please.
You contribute nothing to society, but cost a small fortune in education, health care etc. Your hedonistic approach to life is ridiculous; why are you not doing your homework and having some ambition to make something of your life
[quote][p][bold]hapablab[/bold] wrote: first off im 15 years old, and the only people involved that i didnt know was the girl herself, but i can tell you that these are nice people, we sit around smoking a bit of dope, playing playstation watching rubbish tv and stuff, yet you call us scum. but then again, at least 20-25% of all the under18 year olds i know, like the people i go to school with, who do NOT take drugs go out drinking in the streets and on the beach every friday and saturday night, vomiting, getting paraletic filling up emergency wards, vandalising the town and being very antisocial, yet this is ok? we cause no harm to the comunity by sitting around at the weekends, and we're the scum? explain please.[/p][/quote]You contribute nothing to society, but cost a small fortune in education, health care etc. Your hedonistic approach to life is ridiculous; why are you not doing your homework and having some ambition to make something of your life stan bailey
hapablab wrote: i didnt know gabby but i know the 2 arrested and have spent many a night in the adress pictured and i know that she died because she took a "legal" drug known as meow with the chemical name 4-methylmethcathinon
e which is actually unclassified as it hit the streets earlier this year and can be bought online, which is an outrage. someone allready died up north from this drug, i have taken it but never again... how many deaths until the law gets set on this drug... and its not like she took loads of this stuff, my eye witness friends say she took 1 small line of it, less than the standard dose. if 1 line can kill someone, they should sort this **** out. personally im annoyed that this stuff is still technically legal and that 2 people i know really well are going down for probably years...
she shpuldn't have been able to take any, let alone '1 small line'. as for 15 year-olds just hanging out and smoking dope, i think the dope here is you. at 15 your education is the most important thing in your life, and you don't seem to care. i can see that you have taken on board that this drug is dangerous, but so are all drugs. when will kids learn that dealers only give this stuff away to get you hooked into an expensive habit that destroys your life. if the people you know well go down for years, it serves them right, the longer the better. this address is clearly being used as a drugs den, and needs closing down.
[quote][p][bold]hapablab[/bold] wrote: i didnt know gabby but i know the 2 arrested and have spent many a night in the adress pictured and i know that she died because she took a "legal" drug known as meow with the chemical name 4-methylmethcathinon e which is actually unclassified as it hit the streets earlier this year and can be bought online, which is an outrage. someone allready died up north from this drug, i have taken it but never again... how many deaths until the law gets set on this drug... and its not like she took loads of this stuff, my eye witness friends say she took 1 small line of it, less than the standard dose. if 1 line can kill someone, they should sort this **** out. personally im annoyed that this stuff is still technically legal and that 2 people i know really well are going down for probably years...[/p][/quote]she shpuldn't have been able to take any, let alone '1 small line'. as for 15 year-olds just hanging out and smoking dope, i think the dope here is you. at 15 your education is the most important thing in your life, and you don't seem to care. i can see that you have taken on board that this drug is dangerous, but so are all drugs. when will kids learn that dealers only give this stuff away to get you hooked into an expensive habit that destroys your life. if the people you know well go down for years, it serves them right, the longer the better. this address is clearly being used as a drugs den, and needs closing down. davyboy
15 year old kids at a party, various drug cocktails on offer. An adult drug supplier, any one responsible at all in this house ? Did any one think about who might be beforehand or not bother, yeah it's just a bit of harmless fun.
15 year old kids at a party, various drug cocktails on offer. An adult drug supplier, any one responsible at all in this house ? Did any one think about who might be beforehand or not bother, yeah it's just a bit of harmless fun. tim e
An absolute tragic story, a young life wasted to the drug evil. The people who supplied this young girl with the drugs are every bit as guilty as if they had put a gun to her head and pulled the trigger. A life for a life has never been more applicable as now. Also some of the previous posts from her so called "friends" advocating the use of illegal drugs, the way you are going you will soon be reunited with this poor girl. Live by the sword - die by the sword.
An absolute tragic story, a young life wasted to the drug evil. The people who supplied this young girl with the drugs are every bit as guilty as if they had put a gun to her head and pulled the trigger. A life for a life has never been more applicable as now. Also some of the previous posts from her so called "friends" advocating the use of illegal drugs, the way you are going you will soon be reunited with this poor girl. Live by the sword - die by the sword. popsvoice
This is a very sad story and I feel extremely sorry for her parents when I found out they were the first people I thought of. No parents should ever have their child's life taken from them especially at such a young age, so i strongly hope that all teenagers realise they should not be taking drugs. I'm 16 and Gabbie was a wonderful person who never did anything wrong to anyone and did not deserve to die. I knew Gabbie and the two people arrested and I know for a fact neither of them provided the drugs which would have caused her death. I also know she had been complaining of being ill before the Saturday. I'm fully confident that all her friends that I know will not be taking this disgusting drug again. I have never taken it as I always saw it as drity. I think it would be disrespectful for her friends, Gabbie herself and even more so for her parents if anyone was to take this drug again. I think it should not only be made illegal in this country but across the world. The sad truth is her parents will never get to see her again and if you are a young person think about how her parents must feel, I cant even begin to imagine the trauma they are going though by taking meow you could be doing the same to your parents. I don't think that members of the public should be calling her friends scum fair enough if its your point of view but don't you think we're not seriously upset and disturbed by it calling people scum and having ago at them isn't going to do anything. All that can be done now is to make sure this never happens again. I will miss Gabbie for ever and will never forget her. But please just have some respect for her parents and friends don't you think they've been though enough.
This is a very sad story and I feel extremely sorry for her parents when I found out they were the first people I thought of. No parents should ever have their child's life taken from them especially at such a young age, so i strongly hope that all teenagers realise they should not be taking drugs. I'm 16 and Gabbie was a wonderful person who never did anything wrong to anyone and did not deserve to die. I knew Gabbie and the two people arrested and I know for a fact neither of them provided the drugs which would have caused her death. I also know she had been complaining of being ill before the Saturday. I'm fully confident that all her friends that I know will not be taking this disgusting drug again. I have never taken it as I always saw it as drity. I think it would be disrespectful for her friends, Gabbie herself and even more so for her parents if anyone was to take this drug again. I think it should not only be made illegal in this country but across the world. The sad truth is her parents will never get to see her again and if you are a young person think about how her parents must feel, I cant even begin to imagine the trauma they are going though by taking meow you could be doing the same to your parents. I don't think that members of the public should be calling her friends scum fair enough if its your point of view but don't you think we're not seriously upset and disturbed by it calling people scum and having ago at them isn't going to do anything. All that can be done now is to make sure this never happens again. I will miss Gabbie for ever and will never forget her. But please just have some respect for her parents and friends don't you think they've been though enough. red-arrow
A 14 year old girl has died whilst in the care of somebody old enough to be a 'responsible adult'. No matter who, where, how, what, or when, the most important thing is that if anybody apart from Gabi herself was involved in her death, however connected, they should be brought to justice. Ther seem to be a few comments from people on here who seem to know EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED, so for God's sake, stop acting like a bunch of immature schoolchildren, and contact the police with any solid knowledge that you have. The police WILL find out the truth in the end, today's technology will see to that, so stop hiding information and postponing the inevitable, and if you do know anything, pick up the phone, dial 0845 60 70 999 and ask to speak to detective French at Brighton CID. This message is not from anybody involved with the Police. I do not know Gabi or any of her family, but send my heart felt condolences to everybody involved at this awfully difficult time. Please, stop talking rubbish and speculating about things that you do not know, and tell the police what you know, so that the person or persons responsible may be brought to justice. It wont bring the poor girl back, but it may prevent this from happening again.
A 14 year old girl has died whilst in the care of somebody old enough to be a 'responsible adult'. No matter who, where, how, what, or when, the most important thing is that if anybody apart from Gabi herself was involved in her death, however connected, they should be brought to justice. Ther seem to be a few comments from people on here who seem to know EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED, so for God's sake, stop acting like a bunch of immature schoolchildren, and contact the police with any solid knowledge that you have. The police WILL find out the truth in the end, today's technology will see to that, so stop hiding information and postponing the inevitable, and if you do know anything, pick up the phone, dial 0845 60 70 999 and ask to speak to detective French at Brighton CID. This message is not from anybody involved with the Police. I do not know Gabi or any of her family, but send my heart felt condolences to everybody involved at this awfully difficult time. Please, stop talking rubbish and speculating about things that you do not know, and tell the police what you know, so that the person or persons responsible may be brought to justice. It wont bring the poor girl back, but it may prevent this from happening again. elmagico
hapablab wrote: first off im 15 years old, and the only people involved that i didnt know was the girl herself, but i can tell you that these are nice people, we sit around smoking a bit of dope, playing playstation watching rubbish tv and stuff, yet you call us scum. but then again, at least 20-25% of all the under18 year olds i know, like the people i go to school with, who do NOT take drugs go out drinking in the streets and on the beach every friday and saturday night, vomiting, getting paraletic filling up emergency wards, vandalising the town and being very antisocial, yet this is ok? we cause no harm to the comunity by sitting around at the weekends, and we're the scum? explain please.
You contribute nothing to society, but cost a small fortune in education, health care etc. Your hedonistic approach to life is ridiculous; why are you not doing your homework and having some ambition to make something of your life
Well said, Stan.
[quote][p][bold]stan bailey[/bold] wrote: [quote][p][bold]hapablab[/bold] wrote: first off im 15 years old, and the only people involved that i didnt know was the girl herself, but i can tell you that these are nice people, we sit around smoking a bit of dope, playing playstation watching rubbish tv and stuff, yet you call us scum. but then again, at least 20-25% of all the under18 year olds i know, like the people i go to school with, who do NOT take drugs go out drinking in the streets and on the beach every friday and saturday night, vomiting, getting paraletic filling up emergency wards, vandalising the town and being very antisocial, yet this is ok? we cause no harm to the comunity by sitting around at the weekends, and we're the scum? explain please.[/p][/quote]You contribute nothing to society, but cost a small fortune in education, health care etc. Your hedonistic approach to life is ridiculous; why are you not doing your homework and having some ambition to make something of your life[/p][/quote]Well said, Stan. MoreMikey
i have known gabbie for years since she was about 4 achuly, she is such a lovely girl, i love her to peces, me and her used to have sleepovers lots , mybe she did do drugs so what she still doesnt deseve to die no one does and i wish she would come back coz i know how much everyone miss's her lots , i hope the person who suplied her with drugs if it was to do with that gets put in prison for life , this could of been prevented then my mate would still be here xx rave in peace my little raveing angle, your get that party started were you are now wont you my darlin xx i miss you lots xx
i have known gabbie for years since she was about 4 achuly, she is such a lovely girl, i love her to peces, me and her used to have sleepovers lots , mybe she did do drugs so what she still doesnt deseve to die no one does and i wish she would come back coz i know how much everyone miss's her lots , i hope the person who suplied her with drugs if it was to do with that gets put in prison for life , this could of been prevented then my mate would still be here xx rave in peace my little raveing angle, your get that party started were you are now wont you my darlin xx i miss you lots xx samkbrown
No one has any idea of what exactly happened that day. All people have to go on is that a little girl of 14 has died. This is the very very tragic reality. Her poor young life has ended and her parents and family have to deal with the dreadful reality of this. My heart goes out to them. It is quite wrong to begin acting like a "lynch mob" shouting how much hate and venom one can about the people arrested at the property. Until the facts are known people should not be trying to out do each other with their dreadfull statements of what should happen to them. The media are sensationlist and will paint anyone arrested as sinister. It may be that these people are guilty of something but it just may be that they may also be victims guilty of just being present when a young girl ttook ill and died. Until it is known what has happend then this "lynch mob" attitude should stop!!!
No one has any idea of what exactly happened that day. All people have to go on is that a little girl of 14 has died. This is the very very tragic reality. Her poor young life has ended and her parents and family have to deal with the dreadful reality of this. My heart goes out to them. It is quite wrong to begin acting like a "lynch mob" shouting how much hate and venom one can about the people arrested at the property. Until the facts are known people should not be trying to out do each other with their dreadfull statements of what should happen to them. The media are sensationlist and will paint anyone arrested as sinister. It may be that these people are guilty of something but it just may be that they may also be victims guilty of just being present when a young girl ttook ill and died. Until it is known what has happend then this "lynch mob" attitude should stop!!! shining star
elmagico wrote: A 14 year old girl has died whilst in the care of somebody old enough to be a 'responsible adult'. No matter who, where, how, what, or when, the most important thing is that if anybody apart from Gabi herself was involved in her death, however connected, they should be brought to justice. Ther seem to be a few comments from people on here who seem to know EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED, so for God's sake, stop acting like a bunch of immature schoolchildren, and contact the police with any solid knowledge that you have. The police WILL find out the truth in the end, today's technology will see to that, so stop hiding information and postponing the inevitable, and if you do know anything, pick up the phone, dial 0845 60 70 999 and ask to speak to detective French at Brighton CID. This message is not from anybody involved with the Police. I do not know Gabi or any of her family, but send my heart felt condolences to everybody involved at this awfully difficult time. Please, stop talking rubbish and speculating about things that you do not know, and tell the police what you know, so that the person or persons responsible may be brought to justice. It wont bring the poor girl back, but it may prevent this from happening again.
Couldn't agree more. It does seem that some people know what went on. Maybe the police will look at this webpage and see this for themselves. The truth will come out in the end and the truth may or may not be quite innocent. Whatever the truth may be, I just hope that one of these people who know so much, show some compassion and speak up. I have gone over this terrible tragedy many times in my mind and I keep finding myself asking, "Where was the responsible adult?" My thoughts are with Gabi's family and friends and also with everybody who has been touched by the sad and possibly unnecessary loss of Gabi, who, it is true, was just a child. This is so very very sad.
[quote][p][bold]elmagico[/bold] wrote: A 14 year old girl has died whilst in the care of somebody old enough to be a 'responsible adult'. No matter who, where, how, what, or when, the most important thing is that if anybody apart from Gabi herself was involved in her death, however connected, they should be brought to justice. Ther seem to be a few comments from people on here who seem to know EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED, so for God's sake, stop acting like a bunch of immature schoolchildren, and contact the police with any solid knowledge that you have. The police WILL find out the truth in the end, today's technology will see to that, so stop hiding information and postponing the inevitable, and if you do know anything, pick up the phone, dial 0845 60 70 999 and ask to speak to detective French at Brighton CID. This message is not from anybody involved with the Police. I do not know Gabi or any of her family, but send my heart felt condolences to everybody involved at this awfully difficult time. Please, stop talking rubbish and speculating about things that you do not know, and tell the police what you know, so that the person or persons responsible may be brought to justice. It wont bring the poor girl back, but it may prevent this from happening again.[/p][/quote]Couldn't agree more. It does seem that some people know what went on. Maybe the police will look at this webpage and see this for themselves. The truth will come out in the end and the truth may or may not be quite innocent. Whatever the truth may be, I just hope that one of these people who know so much, show some compassion and speak up. I have gone over this terrible tragedy many times in my mind and I keep finding myself asking, "Where was the responsible adult?" My thoughts are with Gabi's family and friends and also with everybody who has been touched by the sad and possibly unnecessary loss of Gabi, who, it is true, was just a child. This is so very very sad. red-arrow
i was wondering if the recent trend of youngsters, mostly girls, wearing t-shirts of cats and make-up that adds cats whiskers to their face is anything to do with this new party drug, known as meow meow (a mixture of ketamine and plant fertiliser Mephedrone)
a tragic loss of life. i was wondering if the recent trend of youngsters, mostly girls, wearing t-shirts of cats and make-up that adds cats whiskers to their face is anything to do with this new party drug, known as meow meow (a mixture of ketamine and plant fertiliser Mephedrone) londonbythesea
just-a-person wrote: that says it all, you are 15 years old, you stupid stupid child. you think its ok to sit smoking dope ? and the adult in a house is allowing this ? i rest my case. i try to bring my children up the right way yet there are scumbags who think its ok to get or let my child touch the stuff ? spend a day with me then you will understand that smoking puff weed skunk and having sociable weekend drugs are not ok. it wrecks lives, damages childhoods and screws your mind up beyond belief. it is not big and not clever and that adult should be charged with murder, at 39 she should no better
she was 14 and there is no proper way to bring someone up and if u keep them on a lesh there gunna get loose and go crazy on drugs anyways
[quote][p][bold]just-a-person[/bold] wrote: that says it all, you are 15 years old, you stupid stupid child. you think its ok to sit smoking dope ? and the adult in a house is allowing this ? i rest my case. i try to bring my children up the right way yet there are scumbags who think its ok to get or let my child touch the stuff ? spend a day with me then you will understand that smoking puff weed skunk and having sociable weekend drugs are not ok. it wrecks lives, damages childhoods and screws your mind up beyond belief. it is not big and not clever and that adult should be charged with murder, at 39 she should no better[/p][/quote]she was 14 and there is no proper way to bring someone up and if u keep them on a lesh there gunna get loose and go crazy on drugs anyways emilyelektro123