Backgrounding is possible if the second eventuality is either a state or if it is presented with progressive viewpoint. This means that, in order to test for backgrounding, the representations for individual sentences must contain information about the aspectual properties of the described eventualities-- for example, whether an eventuality is a state or a non-state (event), and whether it is presented with simple aspect (external viewpoint) or progressive aspect (internal viewpoint). It is widely known that the aspectual properties of a described eventuality depend on certain properties of the verb 17 and also on other elements such as the referents of NP arguments. For example, the event described by:
(5) Daniel climbed a mountain.
is a Vendler accomplishment. Alternatively, we may characterise it in Krifka's terms as having the property +Q (quantized) or -CUM (non-cumulative), which are equivalent to the lack of a natural endpoint or culmination. However, the event described by:
(6) Daniel climbed mountains.
is a Vendler activity, and in Krifka's terms has the property -Q/+CUM. Here we see what Krifka describes as a "mapping" from the properties of the NP object is to the properties of the event. The referent of 'a mountain' is +Q, and so is the event of (5). The referent of 'mountains' is -Q, and so is the event of (6). Such mapping from the properties of the object to the properties of the event only occurs for certain verbs, however--those where what Krifka calls the
17E.g. 'basic aspectual type' in Moens' terms (Moens, 1987) and semantic features in both Verkuyl's (1989) and Krifka's (1991) accounts.
lSMore strictly the "patient", as it is thematic roles and not grammatical roles that are important here.
"thematic relation" between the object and the event has an appropriate property. One such property that enables this mapping is what he calls gradual patient. In such cases, there is an intuitive relationship between the "progress" of the object and the progress of the event. For example, in an eating event, the object is gradually consumed, and in a writing event, the object is gradually created. Both 'eat' and 'write', as well as 'climb' thus have thematic relations with the property gradual pat ient. Driving events do not, on the other hand, exhibit this correspondence between the progress of the event and the progress of the object. Thus the thematic relation between object and event for 'drive' does not have the gradual pat ient property, which explains why:
(7) John drove the car.
is +CUM/-Q even though 'the car' is -CUM/+Q. 19 In our EKN account we encode Krifka's properties of thematic relations as types of situations and individuals. For example, the lexical entry for 'climb' includes the following information:
Z S,Y ] climb(X,Y) GRAD-PAT
The grammar rules then make reference to this information. For example, the rule: vbar( . . . . ) --> v( . . . . ), np( . . . . ) contains a procedure which evaluates the Q-value of the predicate (vbar) according to the following algorithm:
If: The thematic relation between S and Y is of type GRAD-PAT Then: Set the Q-value of the predicate (vbar) to be the same as that of Y Otherwise: Set the Q-value of the predicate to -Q.
The Q-value of the agent 2° also affects that of the described eventuality. For example, the eventuality described by:
(8) Emily climbed the mountain.
is +Q, whereas that described by:
(9) People climbed the mountain.
is -Q. In (9), the -Q value of the agent is transferred to the event. In order to deal with such examples, the rule s ( . . . ) --> r ip(. . . ) , vp( . . . )
19A well-known test for the property +CUM/-Q of predicates is the ability to combine with a for-adverbial.
2°Corresponding to the grammatical subject in these active sentences.
named(X,'Fiona )
I STATE
Figure 6: Representation for (le) at the point of processing 'then'.
contains a similar algorithm to the one in the vbar rule.
Thus the representation constructed by parsing a sentence includes information about the aspectual properties of the described eventuality. These include the features +/ -STATE and +/ -Q as already described, together with +/ -PROG depending on whether or not progressive aspect is present, and +/ -PUNCT which distinguishes punctual and nonpunctual events (corresponding to the difference between achievements and accomplishments).
Let us now consider the representation from the processing of:
(le) Fiona was a girl then.
up to the point where 'then' is reached. This is given (in slightly simplified form) in Figure 6.
Now suppose we are processing (lc,le):
(lc) Emily climbed Ben Nevis.
(le) Fiona was a girl then.
The rule for par t -o f 'then' requires that the second eventuality is either a state or it is described with progressive viewpoint. The former is true in this case, so the conditions for par t -o f 'then' are satisfied. The representation obtained for (lc,le) is shown in Figure 7.
The semant ics of ~part-of ' What exactly does it mean for the par t -o f (~) relation to hold between two eventualities? The idea is that if $2 ~ $1, then any infon which is supported by $2 is also supported by $1. In other words, $2 adds further information to S1, causing it to be more fully specified. Here we exploit the partiality of situation theory. Situations may be only partially specified: if we say that $1 supports ~, this does not tell us anything about what other information S1 does or does not support. It is thus possible for a later utterance to add further information about $1 and thereby specify it more fully. If the first utterance tells us that $1 supports the infon ~r, and the second tells us that $2 supports the infon 7" and also that $2 <1 $1, then we know that $1 supports both a and v. This is straightforward enough for the elaboration case. We need to consider carefully what it means in a backgrounding case such as (la,le).
According to our theoretical analysis, if an eventuality is backgrounded then it does not introduce an occurrence-time of its own. Instead, the backgrounded eventuality is of the same duration as that of the preceding event-- it "takes on" the time of that event. 21 Thus, in the representation of (lc,le) in Figure 7, the backgrounded $2 has the same temporal extent as the event $1. This amounts to claiming that (le) describes only the part of the state that coincides with the preceding event. Of course we know that the state of Fiona's being a girl began before and continues after Emily's cl imb--there is a relationship of temporal inclusion between the "total duration" of the state and the event. But we are saying that those parts of the state that are before and after the event are not described but are inferred from our world knowledge about the duration of such states.
Stative verbs are "natural backgrounders" in that they describe eventualities without making reference to the beginning and end points of the eventuality. They naturally describe a situation which can readily be seen as a temporal "slice" of a more prolonged situation. For this reason, in the lexical entries for stative verbs in our grammar, there is no mention of the occurrence-time of the state. Progressives usually behave in a similar way. When an event described with progressive viewpoint follows one with simple (perfective) viewpoint, the relation between them is normally one of backgrounding. The effect of progressive viewpoint is to present the event from an internal perspective. An event described with internal perspective is no longer temporally bounded-- it does not have an occurrence-time of its own. Instead, its duration is that of the preceding event, just as in the stative case.
If we define two instances of the par t -o f relation:
. <1 bg for the backgrounding case
* _ el for the elaboration case we can thus say:
S2 ~ b s $1 ) T2 = Tz where T1,T2 are the temporal durations of $I and $2 respectively. And:
S~ <l el $1 -'--+ T2 ___ T1
Thus, for the general <l relation:
$2 <I $1 ) T2 C T1
21Evidence for this comes from an analysis of 'at the time' and 'at the same time'. See (Glasbey, ms2) for details.
r~ --+ $1, r2 ~ X, r3 --+ Y, r4 -~ R1, rs -> TI, r6 --~ $2, r7 --~ U, rs --~ R~ climb(X,V)
(la) Emily climbed Ben Nevis in July.
(lf) Fiona was climbing Snowdon then.
In this case, an ETR is present and the second sentence has progressive aspect. This means that the conditions for both ETI~ 'then' and par t -o f 'then' are met.Our grammar will thus cause two representations to be generated for (la, lf), corresponding to the two readings that we identified in Section 1.
3 Genera l remarks
3.1 Fur ther Deve lopments
The system parses sequences of any length, keeping track of all the discourse referents/roles introduced so far. Thus, as it stands at present, it will find a temporal referent for 'then', irrespective of how far back in the discourse that referent was introduced. It may be desirable to refine this in some way--for example, to disallow anaphoric reference to an ETR that is more than a certain "distance" back in the discourse. Also, the system at present finds only the most recently introduce temporal referent. This could easily be modified--for example, in order to allow it to produce a set of alternatives. However, it appears that we would need to take discourse structure into account here.
3.2 Relat ion to other accounts of temporal reference
It is important to consider how our analysis fits with other work on temporal reference in discourse, and how readily our treatment of 'then' could be incorporated into these accounts. Kamp and Reyle (forthcoming) present a DRT fragment which deals with temporal reference but does not include 'then'. In (Glasbey, forthcoming) and (Glasbey, 1992) we present a modification of Kamp and Reyle's fragment which incorporates our analysis of 'then'. We make the necessary distinction between what we call "explicit" and "inferred" times by allowing a temporal referent to be introduced only when an explicit temporal referent is present. If there is no ETR, only an event referent may be introduced. This enables us to produce the correct readings for 'then'. We consider the ST/DRT account given in the present paper to be preferable, however, in that situation theory allows us to express information about the utterance in a way that traditional DRT does not. This enables us to make precisely the distinction we need between whether or not a particular referent was phonologically realised in the utterance.
Lascarides and Asher (1991) present an account of temporal reference where discourse relations between eventualities are deduced by means of defeasible reasoning. Their account is expressed in a version of
DRT and preliminary investigations suggest that it could be extended to include 'then' in a similar way to the Kamp and Reyle fragment.
4 Conc lus ion
We have developed a computational gramlnar which parses discourse consisting of sequences of simple sentences containing a range of tense and aspect constructions. In particular, it generates the required readings for sentence-final 'then'. We have also indicated how our analysis of 'then' could be incorporated into some existing DRT accounts of temporal reference. The system appears to be capable of various refinements involving more detailed theories of discourse structure, and as such may provide a basis for development of more extensive systems for discourse analysis.
