Alumni & Parents
Tuition Assistance Support still needed for 09-10
Tuition assistance requested and granted for choristers in all SVCC choirs and classes this year exceeds $8,200. Presently we have received $500. toward this fund. The SVCC remains committed to helping to provide outstanding musical experiences to all interested children and families regardless of their financial status. If you would like to help provide tuition assistance for deserving choristers, please contact the office.
These are some comments from children and parents who have received tuition assistance:
I think that choir means more than just singing, practicing, and performing. I think choir means making friends, learning new musical skills, meeting goals, having a good time, and perfecting every day skills. Choir is really a wonderful opportunity. - Ellie Overman , age 11, grade 5, first year Treble Choir
SVCC offers both musical education which is second to none, but also larger life lessons like being welcoming, remaining poised under stress, and confidence to do difficult things. I was delighted to see my daughter sparkle with confidence and the joy of performing beautiful music! Although the program is worth its weight in gold, there's no way we could participate without some financial assistance. Having a scholarship provided is both practical and encouraging! The money provided made our musical dreams for my daughter a reality. - Julie Overman , first year choir parent
Dorrall (16, 5 year member) LOVES anything that has to do with singing and music! I have known since he was small that if there was a way for him to be in choirs/programs I was going to try and make that happen. But, due to my financial situation, and as a single parent too, I was not able to send him.
My son has been blessed to have been able to attend and sing at some of the greatest performances-for presidents, Desmond Tutu, and in Hawaii. He has gained knowledge and musical wisdom that I know will continue to follow him throughout his life. He is a better person for being allowed to sing along with other talented youngsters. He has been disciplined in his music far beyond most other choirs. The SVCC offers a wonderful program for these children to learn and grow in their God-given talents.
Had it not been for the people who have supported and given to the SVCC my son would never have been able to learn and grow musically and to have had such a wonderful experience. For this, I am and will always be truly humbled and grateful to those who have contributed to Dorrall's life in music! With my best wishes, - Doris Furry Price , choir parent
"The choir has given me more opportunities than any other organization I have been a part of. Carnegie Hall and Hawaii are just two of the places that I have been able to visit with the choir - places that I know I would have never been able to otherwise. Looking back now, I realize that those trips were once-in-a-lifetime, and I am so grateful that I did go, because I probably will never have that opportunity again. The choir has touched so many people, locally and nationally, and I am very thankful that I can be a part of it. The SVCC is a wonderful organization, and I hope that it will continue to touch and enrich children's lives - just like it did mine. " ~ - Anonymous Chorister , 10th Grade, 9th year with the SVCC
"I really love to sing, and performing with SVCC provides a way for me to make people smile! Performing with the brass quintet for the Christmas concert was amazing! Ms. White picks really diverse, beautiful, and fun songs, and she encourages us to learn more about the music. She expects a lot from us, and has a way of bringing out the very best in us. I am thankful for all the new friends I have made, and the chance to be a part of the Concert Choir. I am learning so much this year". - Anonymous chorister , 12 years old, 6th grade, 1st year Concert Choir
My daughter has gained confidence in her singing, and Ms. White's affirmation of the children is quite powerful to witness. They strongly desire to please her, and she, in turn, rewards their discipline and dedication with praise well deserved, and they all share in the joy of the music they make together. It is an incredible team effort, as I watch my daughter faithfully practice four times a week. She is growing up before my very eyes, and I think this program has that unique ability to come alongside parents, and offer a great reason for students to work hard, be disciplined, and endeavor to do their best.
I think being a part of something that is bigger than you is a wonderful experience to have while still a kid, and SVCC offers each student there a chance to sound fuller, richer and more magnificent than they could ever sound on their own-It's a gift given to them.
We wouldn't be able to participate without the tuition assistance from the SVCC ." - Anonymous parent , 1st year
I absolutely love music and my goal in life is to become a music educator. The musicianship, music knowledge, and experience I have gained being in the SVCC will benefit me throughout my life and career. With my mom being a single parent, my participation in SVCC could not have been possible without the tuition assistance program. I am extremely grateful! - Mary Granofsky , 16 years old, 10th grade, and 7th year in SVCC
I am really impressed with SVCC . With the help of the tuition assistance program I am able to watch my child learn and grow. Not only is my child learning through the use of solfege, so am I. I feel the SVCC is a great way to build a child's confidence and help them get over the fear of getting in front of people. Singing is not only learning but sharing our gifts to our community. What a special reward. - Kitty Cabana , first year choir parent
"I am thankful for the opportunity to sing for and learn from the Shenandoah Valley Children's Choir. I have been in choir for the past three years, and have received tuition assistance/scholarships every year. I would not have been able to participate if not for the help and contributions of others who believe in the mission of SVCC . Performing at concerts, learning solfege and music theory, and singing in outreach concerts for the community of Harrisonburg and beyond has shaped my life. I would recommend SVCC to any child - the joys of learning and performing music can bring healing, growth, and opportunity." - Emma Serrels , age 16, 4th year in Concert Choir