Here is a summary of recent "news" about Waldorf or Steiner schools, Anthroposophy (the religion concocted by Rudolf Steiner), and Rudolf Steiner himself.   Because Waldorf or Steiner schools [1] rarely make headlines - indeed, they generally prefer to avoid public scrutiny - many of the news accounts represented here are minor or tangential. To compensate, I include material  from blogs and other unconventional sources. [2]
I try to post several new items each week. I excerpt each item briefly, quoting verbatim, and I provide a link you can use if you want to read the entire piece at its original location. I give dates according to US convention; thus, for example, 9-12-2011 is September 12, 2011. In general, I do not correct typos or other errors in the texts I quote. (Indeed, because I necessarily work fast, I may commit some typos of my own).  I confine myself to English-language sources, and I bypass items that are not freely available (i.e., I skip anything for which a subscription is required).
Items appear in reverse chronological order. The first item is the most recent; the last is the oldest. The chronology gets a little scrambled because Google (on whom I rely) does not always find all stories on the day they are released. I drop items when they become too old - generally after a few weeks. I move these dropped items to a " News Archive ". [3]
- Roger Rawlings
Quote of the Day [4]
"At the beginning of their existence on the earth, human beings possessed a knowledge not only of what was on the earth but also of the stars in the heavens. The reason why today this knowledge has degenerated into superstition - I have often spoken of this - is that, as time went on, these things were no longer investigated and hence came to be misunderstood. Originally there was a widespread knowledge of the stars; today the only knowledge of the stars that exists is one that makes calculations about them. But it is unable to penetrate to their spiritual reality." -    Rudolf Steiner,  THE EVOLUTION OF THE EARTH AND MAN AND THE INFLUENCE OF THE STARS (Anthroposophic Press, 1987),  p p.  226-227.
Steiner taught that we are evolving to higher and higher levels of spirituality and consciousness. However, he also taught that the ancients tended to understand spiritual reality better than we do today. [See, e.g., " The Ancients ".] He said that we happen to live in a time when the truth of his teachings is not universally apparent. In the past, his teachings would have been more readily accepted, and they will be clearly known to be true in the future.
Steiner claimed - and his followers believe - that most spiritual teachings today, including those of the major religions, are largely or wholly wrong, having degenerated to the level of superstition. Only "spiritual science" - i.e., the Steiner belief system - contains full, reliable Truth. Likewise, all sciences today, such as astronomy, are hollow - they fail to penetrate to spiritual truths (such as can be found in Steiner's version of astrology). Thus, according to Rudolf Steiner's followers, only "spiritual science" is a True science. And thus,  according to Rudolf Steiner's followers,  only  Rudolf Steiner's followers see the universe truly. Only their view, indeed, is truly holy. [See, e.g., " Gnosis ", " Serving the Gods ", " Guru ", and " Star Power " .] And this is the view underlying Waldorf education. [See, e.g., " Spiritual Agenda ".]
If you want to learn about Waldorf education, this book and its companion (Vol. 2) provide a good starting point.
Rudolf Steiner is long gone, but Waldorf teachers today continue to study his words devotedly;
indeed, Waldorf teacher training centers on the study of Steiner's books and lectures.
For a look at Waldorf faculty meetings presided over by Steiner, see " Faculty Meetings ".
Blogs such as the one quoted below are no substitute for an in-depth examination of the Waldorf movement.
"Ocean Charter is a Waldorf Education Public Charter School [California, USA] and nothing like any other Public school I've seen. They learn by painting, drawing, creating, and/or singing songs (multiplication/division/mythology/geology/everything!) ... instead of textbooks. Their teachers are not music teachers, they are not experts in any one subject - they teach all of it, and it is a strong and loving understanding between the teacher and student that the Teachers are learning along with the kids." [2-16-2012 http://tiffanypeterson.com/tag/waldorf-education/ ]
This is a typical, wide-eyed, enthusiastic first impression of a Waldorf school. Many people respond this way when first seeing Waldorf education in action.
But many people also become disillusioned, sometimes quite soon. [1]
Pause and consider what the enthusiastic blogger is saying. "P ainting, drawing, creating, and/or singing songs" are wonderful activities, and they should be included in all school curriculums. But can kids really learn "everything" by doing these things? Physics? Alegbra? French? World history? The main thing you learn from doing a lot of painting is how to paint. This is a good thing to learn. But it isn't a method for learning "everything." Ditto for "drawing, creating, and/or singing songs" - good activities, but not the end-all and be-all of education. (A teacher might come up with a clever song that lists all the Presidents of the United States in order, and kids might learn this song, but we would be fooling ourselves if we thought that learning such songs is a substitute for actually studying history.) [2]
What about the absence of textbooks in Waldorf schools? Is this really what you want for your children? Consider. It means that the only source for the information your child will receive will be the teachers themselves. No other views will be presented, and no real authorities will be studied. The Waldorf view, and only the Waldorf view, will be taught. Parents are often impressed by the lovely classbooks that Waldorf students create, largely by copying what the teachers have written and drawn on the blackboard. But this is no substitute for reading authoritative textbooks. [3]
Note that Waldorf teachers " are not experts in any one subject - they teach all of it." Is this really what you want? Teachers who do not know any subject in depth, but who teach all subjects? This is indeed what Waldorf schools offer, and it guarantees that students will often be taught by people who are unable to take them deeply into any subject. Everything will be superficial and, to one degree or another, wrong. [4]
It is true that Waldorf teachers are often loving individuals with good intentions. They tend to revere children, and this can be extremely attractive. To understand what is going on, however, realize that the teachers' attitude toward children grows out of the Waldorf religion, Anthroposophy. According to that religion, children have recently arrived from the spirit realm, where they lived - as reincarnating beings - before coming to Earth for their newest incarnation. Thus, children bring with them more recent memories of the spirit realm than the teachers themselves possess, and they should be honored for this. Also, Waldorf teachers believe it is their karma to teach these particular children, just as it is the children's karma to be taught by these teachers. [5]
If you find yourself getting excited about Waldorf schooling, pause, gather yourself, and think carefully. Waldorf schools are often fun places full of beauty and good feeling. They may not, however, be very good schools - i.e., places where kids get a good education. [6] The main Waldorf objective is not to teach children but to give them spiritual assistance in the process of incarnation and in the fulfillment of karma.* And, of course, the teachers hope to steer children toward truth - which, in their opinion, is Anthroposophy. [7]
* Here are sample statement by Waldorf teachers explaining the real purpose of Waldorf schools: • "[T]he purpose of [Waldorf] education is to help the individual fulfill his karma." • "Waldorf education strives to create a place in which the highest beings [i.e., gods], including the Christ, can find their home...."  • "Waldorf education is based upon the recognition that the four bodies of the human being [the physical, etheric, astral, and ego bodies] develop and mature at different times." For more, see " Spiritual Agenda ".  For more on incarnation and the four human bodies, see " Incarnation ".
[4] A Waldorf teacher will often begin with a group of students in 1st grade and stay with that group through 5th or even 8th grade, teaching most subjects at all of these grade levels. No teacher is truly qualified to do this. To look into Waldorf teacher training, see " Teacher Training " and " Waldorf Teachers - How Are They Trained? ".
"'We had a donation of £88,000 from the closure of Drayton Manor Trust. This money is with Hermes Trust and is out on loan to schools. Our trustees have agreed to leave it with Hermes Trust for the time and review annually. There is a year's notice to withdraw this and the money can then be drawn down over five years. We also had donations from ASGB [i.e., the Anthroposophical Society of Great Britain] - £2,937.50 towards our PR work and a further £5,000 to help with Free School applications. Sturdy Edwards Insurance Company gave a donation of £400 and we had £416.46 from the closure of Johnshaven Kindergarten. We also received £15,861 from various Camphill Communities. We are grateful for those individuals who make regular donations to SWSF.' [Emphasis added. /a]
"The sum recieved from the Anthroposophical Society is not huge - £3000 for PR and the £5000 for free school applications. But one might still ask: why does the Anthroposophical Society pay for waldorf school PR and the free school applications (to obtain state-funding for the schools)? Why do anthroposophists have any interest in helping schools and organizations which [claim they] want to distance themselves  from Steiner and anthroposophy (there are many more examples of such behaviour) ... were it not for the fact that the distancing itself is a PR move?
For more on Waldorf PR efforts, see " PR ". For background on the effort to have Steiner schools accepted as "free schools" in the UK, see " Coming Undone ". Also see previous coverage at the News Archive .
IPPSAL is the Independent Private and Parochial Schools Athletic League
on Long Island, New York.]
For a discussion of sports at Waldorf schools, see items below on this page and at the News Archive .
From Mother Nature Network:
"Last week, MNN [i.e., Mother Nature Network] parenting blogger Jenn Savedge asked an excellent question about technology in the classroom: How much is enough?    She cited a NY Times article that covered the trend of Silicon Valley parents sending their kids to Waldorf schools - where no technology is used in the learning environment. If the pioneers of technology were limiting their own children's use of computers, then what does that mean for the rest of the parents out there struggling with the question?
"Yesterday, a counter-argument emerged. The New York Times profiled a school in Mooresville, N.C.,  that's leading the laptops-in-class digital revolution, pointing to some pretty extraordinary test results achieved after introducing laptops into the school (and controversially eliminating 10 percent of their teachers to pay for it). After three years of laptops in classrooms, and a significant overhaul in the way teachers interact with students, the results are in.
"According to the NY Times, 'The district's graduation rate was 91 percent in 2011, up from 80 percent in 2008. On state tests in reading, math and science, an average of 88 percent of students across grades and subjects met proficiency standards, compared with 73 percent three years ago. Attendance is up, dropouts are down.' Those are some pretty unignorable stats, and that's with increased class sizes - all of which has educators talking, and regularly visiting the school to see how they do what they do." [2-14-2012    http://www.mnn.com/green-tech/computers/blogs/laptop-learning-one-school-boasts-higher-scores-but-should-others-go-virt ]
Mother Nature Network is hardly gung-ho on computers, so this item may be of special interest. The debate over the use of computers in schools will doubtless go on and on. Most Waldorf schools fear and shun computers, but not all Waldorf schools do, at least not completely. On the other side, the Mooresville public school does not attribute all of is success to computers. High-tech gear constitutes just one part of the school's sophisticated educational approach. The chief take-away for people interested in Waldorf schools is that the typical Waldorf aversion to technology is excessive; indeed, it may be simply wrong. [For more on the Waldorf approach, see " Spiders, Dragons and Foxes ".]
Here is a follow-up to a story we have been following:
"Toxic chalice for Footscray City principal
"Just days into his new job as principal of Footscray City Primary [Australia], Steve Warner was given the unenviable task of axing the school's Steiner stream.
"The Department of Education decided in October last year to cut the stream and sack the school council, sparking outrage among parents who campaigned unsuccessfully to have it reinstated.
"This year, the school's enrolment has dropped to 170 prep to grade 6 pupils after most of the 120 children enrolled in the Steiner stream sought to continue at other Steiner schools.
FAIRY WORLDS AND WORKERS, by Marjorie Spock (Anthroposophical Press, 1980).
Classic Anthroposophical texts are sometimes hard to locate. Tip: Try services such as Alibris and AbeBooks.
Consider  the invaluable FAIRY WORLDS AND WORKERS: A Natural History of Fairy land  (Anthroposophical Press, 1980) .  As of today, February 14, 2012 (Happy Valentine's Day!), only a few used copies are on the market, and there is no consensus as to what they may be worth. At Alibris , copies are offered for prices ranging from $9.45 to $100.00 . Abe's selection is somewhat larger, bearing prices from $9.45 to $118.00 .
Here's how the book is described by its publisher: "The Middle Kingdom! Various times and peoples have given it different names. To some it was Paradise, to others Tir-nan-Og; Arthurian Avalon; Fairyland; the World of Immortal Youth; the Land of Heart's Desire. Where exactly is that country? Well, if God's is the world of creative power and ours the world of created objects, the fairy world is the land of life that lies between them, serving as the bridge for their interaction.
"The fairyland and its denizens have long been the concern of poets, painters, and storytellers. Not only are these beings charged with the maintenance of Nature's household but with her evolutionary plans as well. Our recognition of them and their work helps their efforts prosper and helps the earth be carried forward in its evolution. Marjorie Spock draws aside the veil obscuring the life of the 'Little People' and makes their magic world come alive for us. " [ http://www.steinerbooks.org/detail.html?id=088010404x ]
What many people have difficulty grasping is that Anthroposophists believe that Fairy Land literally exists, and the Fairy Folk are real beings.
"That fairyland and its denizens should be as much a concern of scientists as they have long been of poets and painters and storytellers was one of [Rudolf] Steiner's deep convictions. For he was a close observer of their life and work, and it was clear to him that they were of profound importance to the earth." - Waldorf educator Marjorie Spock, FAIRY WORLDS AND WORKERS, p. 8.
According to Rudolf Steiner, fairies are one form of elemental being, otherwise known as nature spirits. "Whereas it is our physical body that connects us with the realm of physical becoming, our brain connects us with certain elemental beings ... the elemental beings of the myths and sagas. There they are called elves, fairies, and so on." - Rudolf Steiner, THE RIDDLE OF HUMANITY (Rudolf Steiner Press, 1990), lecture, GA 170. For more on these matters, see " Fairy Tales ", " Steiner's Blunders ", and " Neutered Nature ". And hurry to a used book store, or Alibris, or Abe. Copies of Spock's book will disappear fast, perchance. (The cheap copies, anyway.)
Detail from "Sylphs", a brush drawing by Ingrid Gibb, FAIRY WORLDS AND WORKERS, facing p. 17.
Sylphs are nature spirits dwelling in the air. They have been known by many names, such as fairies,
the little folk, the fair folk, and so on. The important thing to understand is that Anthroposophists
- including many Waldorf teachers - think that such beings they really exist.
"Because air is everywhere imbued with light, these sylphs, which live in the airy-warmth element, press towards the light ...
[W]e behold the deepest sympathy between the sylphs and the bird-world ... They are, however, prevented by the cosmic [order] from becoming birds,
for they have another task. Their task is lovingly to convey light to the plant ... The sylph imbues the plant with light; it bears light into the plant."
- Rudolf Steiner, MAN AS SYMPHONY OF THE CREATIVE WORD, Part 3, "The Plant-World and the Elemental Nature-Spirits", lecture 7, GA 230.
"[W]ho cares about 'spiritual-scientific facts'? Only Anthroposophists. It's a closed, self-referencing system, safely insulated from the logic (and responsibilities) of the real world. That's a good reason to call it a cult." [2-13-2012 http://groups.yahoo.com/group/waldorf-critics/message/22835 ]
As usual, an informative (and sometimes heated) discussion is being held at the Waldorf Critics wesbite. Anyone with an interest in Waldorf education should look in occasionally. Both critics and supporters of Waldorf schooling express their views energetically, and the debate - while sometimes flying off the track - can be fascinating.
Much of the language and imagery used in Anthroposophy appears Christian,
and thus it may seem familiar and even welcome to many parents of school-age children in the West.
"SPIRITUAL BEINGS IN THE HEAVENLY BODIES AND IN THE KINGDOMS OF NATURE
"In the architecture of Rudolf Steiner's great cosmological temple, this extraordinary course of lectures on spiritual beings forms the central pillar...
"In these lectures, the reader is led through a series of meditations to recognize these spiritual beings and come to know their deeds.
"Steiner's approach is 'contemporary' in that, while continuous with the most ancient understanding of the cosmos, he discovers it for himself, out of his own experience and consciousness, and expresses it in his own words with a logic and language appropriate to our time. Thus he teaches us, his readers, to do the same. In these lectures, the reader is led through a series of meditations to recognize and come to know the activities and beings of the nine angelic hierarchies:
This new book reinforces several of the themes we have explored here recently. Steiner taught - and his followers believe - that there are spiritual beings all around us, not just in the heavens but in the natural world. Many of these beings are gods, ranging from those that are just one step higher than humans (the angels or Sons of Life) upward to gods nine steps above humans (seraphim or Spirits of Love).*
Steiner's teachings do indeed create a sort of "temple" - that is, they are a body of religious doctrines. Along with these doctrines Steiner offers his followers prayers, meditations, and other religious practices to assist them on their spiritual journey. [See, e.g., " Power Words " and " Prayers ".]
Steiner's religious teachings arise principally from ancient beliefs. He drew especially from Hinduism, and from doctrines that were preserved later in gnostic Christianity and, later still, in Theosophy. [See, e.g., " Veda ", " Gnosis ", and " Basics ".] He also borrowed heavily from mythologies, in particular Norse myths. [See " The Gods ".] He claimed, however, that he independently discovered the spiritual truths contained in these traditions - using his power of clairvoyance, he investigated the spirit realm, read the Akashic Record (an invisible celestial encyclopedia), and attained high initiation. Or so he said. [See, e.g., " Exactly ", " Akasha ", " Inside Scoop ", " Rosy Cross ", and " The White Lodge ".]
Steiner's followers generally consult Steiner's directives as they seek to attain their own clairvoyant wisdom and initiation. This includes many Waldorf teachers, more than a few of whom believe that they are privy to profound occult wisdom. The degree to which Waldorf teachers bring their spiritual convictions into the classroom varies, but all parents interested in Waldorf schools should understand who Rudolf Steiner was and what his followers believe. A book like SPIRITUAL BEINGS IN THE HEAVENLY BODIES AND IN THE KINGDOMS OF NATURE can be a useful introduction.
* Steiner also used other names, sometimes, for the gods of the various "hierarchies". [See " Polytheism ".]
Waldorf or Steiner schools are fundamentally different from other schools,
basing their beliefs and practices on the doctrines of Rudolf Steiner.
But in some superficial ways - such as fielding sports teams -
the schools may seem conventionally wholesome.
Not all Waldorf news is terribly serious or esoteric. From the sports desk:
"GETTING TECHNICAL
"While they aren't rivals of the magnitude of, say, Pioneer and Huron [i.e., rival schools], things got a little testy late in Greenhills' 69-59 win over Rudolf Steiner this week [the school, in Michigan, USA, not the man]. The problems started with about two minutes left in the third quarter, as Greenhills coach Andrew Wright repeatedly begged the refs to call a carry on a Steiner player's dribble, to no avail [i.e., call a foul on a player who was carrying the ball]. 'He looks like my kid in the backyard!' Wright said to the officials. That comment irked Steiner coach Nick Sherwood, who took a couple steps out of the coach's box toward Wright. 'Don't talk about one of my kids like that!' he admonished. Wright immediately apologized. In an effort to rein in the coaches, each got technicals [i.e., technical fouls] shortly thereafter; Sherwood in the last minute of the third quarter and Wright in the first minute of the fourth."  [2-12-2012   http://www.annarbor.com/sports/high-school/dexter-student-section-comes-alive-for-german-geoff-and-more-notes/ ]
Some parents are drawn to Waldorf schools, at least in part, because they want their children to escape the sports-obsessed culture at many public schools. But the truth is that Waldorf schools often use sports much as other schools do: to encourage loyalty and pride among the students, to cement relations with alumni, and to encourage parents and alums to make financial contributions. For Waldorf schools, sports can also serve an additional pupose: making the schools seem, superficially, normal.
The Washington Waldorf School is in Maryland, USA; the Kimberton Waldorf school, host of the tournament, is in Pennsylvania, USA.
Waldorf teams didn't fair well in the two games reported above, but they are sometimes quite successful. The Waldorf school I attended has long had an outstanding soccer [i.e., football] program. The following was posted by the school:
"Waldorf Boys Varsity Soccer Extends Record to 4-2-1
"In their first meeting of the season, the boys varsity soccer team from the Waldorf School of Garden City [New York, USA] traveled to Locust Valley to take on the squad from the Portledge School this past Wednesday. Waldorf dominated the first half with constant pressure from forwards Matt Wasserman and Axel Epie. Waldorf scored at the 17:45 mark when forward Marco Spitaliere, making a far-post run, was able to convert an in-swing corner kick from co-captain and midfielder Peter Escribano, who is the team leader in points for goals and assists this season. [10/06/2011 http://www.waldorfgarden.org/page.cfm?p=560&amp;newsid=13 ]
As for the use to sports in alumni relations efforts:
" Varsity Boys Soccer Alumni Game
"The second Fall Fair Soccer Game was Waldorf's Varsity Boys Soccer Team vs. Alumni Soccer Team. Coached by longtime veteran [sic] Waldorf Coach Laszlo Jurak, the Alumni team seemed to have an endless parade of players - including most of the alumni members from the Class of 2011 [i.e., students who had graduated in June].
"Right from the start, the game took on a showcase exhibition [sic], with speed, power, dynamic passing, wonderful footwork, and incredible goalie play that drew oohs and aahs from the large gathering of spectators. The first half ended with a 1-2 Alumni lead. In the second half, the Alumni team swarmed the Varsity and scored three times to secure the Alumni 1-5 win." [10-22-2012 http://www.waldorfgarden.org/page.cfm?p=551&amp;teamID=21&amp;event=168&amp;show=recap ]
There is no evidence that the kids threw the game to the old-timers.
The following is from a blog at THE NEW YORK TIMES. We have dealt with with subject - vaccination - numerous times previously, but when the TIMES takes note, we should take note:
"How Doctors Could Improve Childhood Vaccination Rates
"...In 'Improving Childhood Vaccination Rates' in the New England Journal of Medicine, Dr. [Douglas] Diekema invites doctors to consider the reluctant or recalcitrant parent as a diagnostic problem ... With vaccination rates in some pockets of the country shrinking (in one Washington State county, Dr. Diekema says, 72 percent of kindergartners and 89 percent of sixth graders are either noncompliant with or exempt from vaccination requirements for school entry, and at a Bay Area Waldorf school * I wrote about last year, only 23 percent of the incoming kindergarten class had been fully vaccinated), doctors who support vaccination (as the vast majority do) need strategies to work with parents." [2-10-2012   http://parenting.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/02/10/how-doctors-could-improve-childhood-vaccination-rates/ ]
Waldorf schools usually promote "Anthroposophic medicine," which is essentially a form of quackery invented by Rudolf Steiner. Anthroposophical doctors do not absolutely reject vaccination as a medical strategy, but they are leery of it, and as a result Waldorf schools can become centers of contagion.
Rudolf Steiner's followers are generally averse to vaccination because they are generally averse to modern science in all its forms. But, specifically, Steiner warned his followers that there are conspiracies afoot that seek to trick people into taking medicines that destroy the soul. Black magicians and other evildoers work to create medicines that deaden people to all things spiritual: "Endeavors to achieve this will be made by bringing out remedies to be administered by inoculation ... [T]hese inoculations will influence the human body in a way that will make it refuse to give a home to the spiritual inclinations of the soul." - Rudolf Steiner, SECRET BROTHERHOODS (Rudolf Steiner Press, 2004), pp. 90-91.
Steiner taught that because a disease may result from karma, interfering with the illness may force the patient to compensate in a future life. Addressing a group of doctors, Steiner said "If we destroy the susceptibility to smallpox, we are concentrating only on the external side of karmic activity." - Rudolf Steiner, MANIFESTATIONS OF KARMA (Rudolf Steiner Press, 2000), pp. 165-166. If karma is not fulfilled in one life, Steiner said, it must be fulfilled (perhaps by having the same disease) in a later incarnation. So, a basic Anthroposophical attitude is to allow diseases to run their course. See, e.g., the Anthroposophical book BLESSED BY ILLNESS, by L.F.C. Mees (Anthroposophic Press, 1990).
* "I really want to rail against the parents of the Waldorf school in the Bay Area with the shocking 23 percent vaccination rate for its kindergarten class. In the abstract, I'm appalled. Everything in me longs to shake those parents and point out that they're free-riding on those of us who do vaccinate. That they would not like to live in pre-vaccination days, when, as Megan McArdle of the AtlanticWire put it , diseases like polio, diphtheria, tetanus and even whooping cough crippled and killed thousands of children every year. That they're endangering people who would choose vaccination but cannot because of age, allergies, or immune system disorders ...   But - there's always a but - I know those parents.... "  [ http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2011/11/01/who_dares_confront_the_parents_of_the_bay_area_waldorf_school_wi.html ]
"Can Steiner school's promoters deliver on their ambitious plans?
"...In a full Assembly Rooms, interested people from the local community  [Frome, UK]  and beyond were presented with a very persuasive argument for choosing Steiner education.
When considering presentations made by advocates of Steiner education, bear in mind that Rudolf Steiner's followers are members of a cult or, if you prefer, a religion - Anthroposophy. They are often well organized and well rehearsed, able to draw on carefully constructed arguments drafted by their cohorts over the years. Of course, not everyone who recommends Steiner education is a dyed-in-the-wool Anthroposophist, and in any case all arguments should be considered and weighed on their merits, regardless of their source. But if you hear "a very persuasive argument for choosing Steiner education" that is supported by "very little evidence," you may want to consider - in the cool light of reason - just how persuasive that argument really is.
"...Here at Spring Garden Waldorf school [Ohio, USA], children are sent outdoors to play and learn a minimum of three times per day - rain or shine, cold or hot. But we don't stop there. Children at our school take gardening as a special subject, often have science and gym class outside, and main lesson teachers spend much time outdoors to reinforce what's being learned in main lesson. " [2-2-2012 http://blog.sgws.org/educating-the-whole-child-naturalistic-intelligence/ ]
Sending kids outdoors multiple times "rain or shine" may or may not be a good idea, but before you enroll a child in a Waldorf school, it is important to understand the Waldorf view of nature. In Waldorf belief, nature is the realm of "nature spirits" - gnomes and other invisible beings. Spending time outdoors means spending time in the presence of such creatures. [See " Neutered Nature ".]
As for educating the "whole child" - in Waldorf belief, a human beings has four bodies (three of which are invisible), both a soul and a spirit, a karma, an astrological sign, a racial identity revealing one's degree of spiritual evolution, a temperament (choleric, melancholic, sanguine, or phlegmatic), a double or doppelgänger, twelve senses, a heart that does not pump blood, a brain that does not really think, etc. The Waldorf view is, to say the least, unusual. [See " Holistic Education " and " What We're Made Of ".]
Try to learn about the Waldorf belief system before consigning a child to the care of people who embrace it.
P.S. At Waldorf schools, the "main lesson" is the first and longest class of the day. Other classes are usually designed to reinforce the main lesson to one degree or another. [See " Curriculum ".]
Impression of eurythmy
[R. R. photo rendering, 2010,
based on p. 31, THE GOETHEANUM
(Philosophical-Anthroposophical Press, 1961)]
"Eurythmy Openings at Monadnock Waldorf School
" Monadnock Waldorf School in Keene, New Hampshire [USA] is seeking to welcome two colleagues to lead and to further develop our eurythmy program in kindergarten through grade twelve.
"Our new eurythmists will find mentoring support from experienced eurythmists as well as a community of colleagues with a deep appreciation and respect for eurythmy. We are a school in which eurythmy has a central role. There is an active artistic eurythmy group working in our area. We hold a strong vision of eurythmy living and deepening in our students and in our community."  [2-3-2012 http://jobs.waldorftoday.com/job/11864/ ]
Eurythmy - a spiritual form of dance - is important in Waldorf education; usually, all students are required to do eurythmy. Drawing on the traditions of temple dancing in many religions, in particular Theosophy, Rudolf Steiner developed eurythmy as a way to express, through movement, the inner or spiritual meaning of creative speech. Eurythmy is often performed in flowing gowns and/or while holding therapeutic copper rods. The movements look a bit like slow-motion modern expressive dance. Kids often find it dull, but they are expected to participate nonetheless.
"Eurythmy is obligatory. The children must participate. Those who do not participate in eurythmy will be removed from the school." - Rudolf Steiner, FACULTY MEETINGS WITH RUDOLF STEINER  (Anthroposophic Press, 1998), p. 65.
Steiner taught that the gods gave us physical bodies, in large part, in order to enable us to do eurythmy. Eurythmy is performed in the worlds above just as it is performed here in the world below. "The human form is the result of divine eurythmy ... [B]ecause eurythmy makes use of the human being as its instrument it enables us to see most deeply into the connection between the human being and the universe." - EURYTHMY AS VISIBLE SPEECH (Rudolf Steiner Press, 1984), p. 13 - lecture synopsis.
The purpose of eurythmy is explicitly religious. "Eurythmy shapes and moves the human organism in a way that furnishes direct external proof of our participation in the supersensible [i.e., invisible, spiritual] world. In having people do eurythmy, we link them directly to the supersensible world." - Rudolf Steiner, ART AS SPIRITUAL ACTIVITY (Anthroposophic Press, 1998), pp. 246-247.
[1]   Anthroposophists often say that the Waldorf school movement is spreading fast. "Today, with more than 900 Waldorf schools in 83 countries, Waldorf Education is the fastest growing independent educational movement in the world." [4-24-2010   http://www.whywaldorfworks.org/02_W_Education/history.asp ] Confirming these claims is difficult, as is determining the total enrollment in Waldorf schools.   A centralized worldwide tally shows 998 Waldorf schools altogether in March, 2011, with 222 Waldorf schools in Germany, 130 in the USA, 92 in the Netherlands, 41 in Sweden, 35 in Switzerland, 33 in Australia, 32 in Great Britain, and so forth. All told, according to this source, there are 686 Waldorf or Steiner schools in Europe, 211 in the Americas, 43 in Oceana (Australia and New Zealand), 36 in Asia*, and 22 in Africa.** For the most part, these numbers are unchanged since a similar survey in January, 2010. The number of Waldorf schools in Germany rose a bit, while there was a slight decrease in Finland, Italy, and Norway. The numbers elsewhere have not changed. [March, 2011   http://waldorfschule.info/upload/pdf/schulliste.pdf ]
Some Waldorf schools are fairly large (more than 300 students).  The Waldorf school I attended had a total enrollment (K-12) of approximately 320. At the other end of the spectrum, some Waldorf schools are so tiny as to be virtually nonexistent. "Glacier Waldorf opened in 2006 and Woodland Montessori...opened in 2006. Enrollments are down this year at both, with just three students at the Waldorf school and 13 kindergarteners at Woodland Montessori." [12-30-2009   http://www.dailyinterlake.com/news/local_montana/article_9defc96e-f50a-11de-a998-001cc4c03286.html ]
* Israel is listed as being in Asia. With 7 Waldorf schools, Israel has more Waldorfs than any other "Asian" country. Japan follows with 6 and India has 5. If we place Israel where it belongs, in the Middle East, then there are 29 Waldorf schools in Asia and 8 in the Middle East (7 in Israel and 1 in Egypt). The Waldorf school in Egypt is the only such school in an Arab or predominantly Muslim country.
** South Africa has 17 Waldorf schools. The rest of Africa has a total of 5 (or 4, if we count Egypt as being in the Middle East).
[2]  I devoted a great deal of attention to blogs during the last quarter of 2010 and the first several weeks of 2011. Thereafter, I geared back. The sorts of statements made by bloggers for and against Waldorf schools do not change much over time, so if you want to get a feel for the online chatter about Waldorf education, see the archived material at the Waldorf Watch Annex,  New Archive , October 2010 through January 2011.
[3] As you read statements made by Anthroposophists and Waldorf teachers, bear this in mind:  Anthroposophists are very good at deceiving people. Indeed, they are good at deceiving themselves. They have to be good at deceiving themselves or they could not possibly accept the doctrines of Anthroposophy. What are these doctrines? We have four bodies, three of which are invisible. Our actions are heavily influenced by karma and the stars. We began our evolution on Saturn. Christ (the Sun God) has already returned. Gnomes or goblins really exist. The heart does not pump blood. The brain does not think. The planets do not orbit the Sun. Islands like Great Britain float in the sea and are held in place by the stars. Waldorf teachers should use clairvoyance, dreams, and horoscopes to get to know their students.
Anthroposophists believe stuff like that.
Waldorf schools generally try to defend themselves by saying that, yes, their methods are based on Anthroposophy (i.e., the clairvoyant "insights" of Rudolf Steiner), but they do not teach Anthroposophy to the students. This is not quite true, but for the moment let's accept it as true. How reassuring is it?
Consider this analogy. Imagine a school that says "All of our methods are based on voodoo. However, we do not teach voodoo to the children." Would you be reassured? Would you send your child to that school?
For this same reason, I encourage you to buy and study at least a few books put out by such publishers as the Rudolf Steiner Press and the Anthroposophic Press. You will be enriching Steiner's followers, which is unfortunate, but if you are serious about Waldorf education, you should work to comprehend what Anthroposophists say and write, especially when they think nobody outside their occult circle is paying much attention.
[4] For the first few weeks of 2012, the Quotes of the Day will come mainly from a single source: Rudolf Steiner, THE EVOLUTION OF THE EARTH AND MAN AND THE INFLUENCE OF THE STARS (Anthroposophic Press, 1987), GA 354. This book consists of talks Steiner gave to a group of workmen. Because Steiner tried to explain his doctrines as clearly as possible for this not-terribly-well-educated audience, the transcripts of these talks hold a special fascination.
To see the entire series of these Quotes, to date, click on this tag: " Daily Quotes 2012 ".