Get My Shy Child Ready for Back to School
Introducing (or reintroducing) your shy child to the social dynamics at school can be challenging, but be assured that social strategies exist that can help even the shyest child.
Introducing (or reintroducing) your shy child to the social dynamics at school can be challenging, but be assured that social strategies exist that can help even the shyest child.
Tip: Ask yourself, "Whose problem is this?" Maybe your child's shyness bothers you more than it bothers your child, and the problem is yours-not your child's. If your child's shyness is isolating him or her, you might ask parents of shy children how they help their kids cope and make friends.
These steps can help your shy child get ready for back to school:
Role-play several conversations with my kid. - Role-playing helps shy kids become comfortable conversing with different kinds of people. Take the part of a new teacher, coach, or potential friend and have your child carry on a conversation. Then switch roles and let your child play the adult or friend. Be sure to keep this activity playful.
Talk with my kid's teachers-in person or by email if necessary-at the start of the school year. - Tell them about your child's personality before major education issues crop up. Ask teachers which strategies they use in the classroom to put shy kids at ease, such as pairing shy kids with outgoing kids for group projects.
Set up a playdate for my child with another kid from school. - Let your child identify a possible friend (someone he or she sits next to in band; someone he or she has seen reading a favorite book) and plan an activity. Help your child choose a familiar location and plan a comfortable, enjoyable activity.
Help my child participate in an after-school activity. - Offer ideas and let your child choose to participate (or not). You might say, for example: "Your cousin is joining the soccer team. Do you want to go to tryouts and see if you like soccer?"
Warning : Be gentle! Never force your shy kid to participate in a club or activity. Not having the option to say no can make your kid withdraw even more.