Community Corner
From "The Big Mystery at the Big Top", Spring 2011
No one does drama like DRAMA KIDS, the most sought after   drama program for children in the world, where every child's a   star!   To be happy and successful in today's highly competitive world,  your child needs to be confident and articulate.   Whether destined for the stage or the boardroom, DRAMA KIDS prepares  children and young adults to speak up clearly with confidence, putting  them on an easier path for lifelong success.   In our   award-winning,  copyrighted, developmental drama program, we use the fun and  creativity of drama to teach fundamental life skills: presentation,  speaking, verbal and non-verbal communication, team work skills  (leadership, discussion, negotiation, compromise), quick on-your-feet  thinking and, above all, confidence and self-esteem.
DRAMA KIDS classes meet for one hour once a week throughout most of the school year in after-school and community programs with a mid-year  parent presentation and a dynamic spring performance.   Each class  features different dramatic activities for greater excitement, fun,  and full student participation which keeps children motivated and  gives them a sense of accomplishment.   When school is out,   we have  imaginative and fun-filled half-day and full-day summer camps.
DRAMA KIDS - We set the 'stage' for success!
Drama Kids of East Montgomery County is owned and operated by professional actress/singer Carolyn Stewart Parker. Ms. Parker has spent the past thirty, enjoyable years working either on-stage, in front of a camera, behind a microphone or teaching others her craft. A veteran of over 70 stage productions, dozens of films and corporate videos, and hundreds of voice-overs, Ms. Parker brings experience, energy and enthusiasm to the Drama Kids curriculum and her students.Climb on board with "Ms. P" and Drama Kids of East Montgomery County and see for yourself how years of experience and the desire to help each and every student to achieve his/her personal best makes a "dramatic difference !"
Information about the program...
Drama Kids develops speaking skills, confidence, and acting skills in children and young adults from ages 5 - 17. We take great pride in our program and in seeing the results in our students.
In order to grow, students need to gain independence and self-esteem, yet work as a team. They want to be challenged and yet feel supported and praised for their efforts. All of these qualities are wonderfully built through drama and in particular, through our internationally recognized Drama Kids program.
Our students come from all walks of life. Some have previous drama experience, but most do not. Our Drama Kids instructors are extensively trained in the Drama Kids program. They have abundant energy, enthusiasm, and a special friendliness that always puts new students immediately at ease and ready to jump into the scene!
Classes meet at a regular location for one hour each week during the school year. We hold classes at a variety of convenient locations and times that best fit the busy schedules of today's students and their parents. Our exclusive program format allows new students to begin almost anytime during the year. Even better, tuition is prorated based on remaining class schedules and there are NO registration fees.
Joining Drama Kids is a very special experience. We are committed to developing our students through an outstanding, high quality program taught by our dynamic teaching staff. Please call or email us for enrollment details today!
In the News
Drama Kids of East Montgomery County Offers Five Myths and Facts of Drama E - (2008-11-05 )
Expert Advice for Parents from Internationally Noted After-School Drama Program
Drama Kids of East Montgomery County, part of an international franchise organization whose proven drama skills program builds communication skills and confidence in children, offers the following myths and facts behind drama education.
"We help students realize their creative potential," said Carolyn Stewart Parker. "We're not aiming to create Broadway stars, rather we are building creative thinking skills, communication skills, confidence and self-esteem. These skills are not being taught in the classroom and are important for success later in life. The program is great for all kids regardless of acting ability and is delivered in a fun and positive environment."
Below, Parker offers the following "myths and facts" about drama classes, including the benefits of drama education offered by Drama Kids of East Montgomery County:
Myth: The purpose of children's drama is to entertain an audience. Fact: The purpose of children's drama is for participants to develop speaking skills, acting skills, creative thinking, confidence and self esteem.   Myth: Drama requires repetitive memorization of lines. Fact: Creative, developmental drama uses new short plays and other drama activities each class.   The focus is on skill development - not line memorization.   Myth: Drama classes are only for children who are not interested in participating in extracurricular athletic programs. Fact: Drama programs are for all children, regardless of physical abilities or sports aptitude. All children stand to gain significant advantages in confidence and in their speaking and presentation skills that a creative drama program provides. In addition, team building skills taught at drama classes help children learn how to work together in a group, which is critical for group projects at school.   In addition, most athletically involved children enjoy the variety that drama provides in their lives.   Myth:   Drama is only for extroverted children. Fact : Drama is great for both "shy" and "outgoing" children. Drama can help introverted children develop their speaking skills and public confidence, provided that they are challenged at a pace that is comfortable and enjoyable for them. Often, parents find that, after participation in drama classes, their so-called "shy" child wasn't introverted after all - they just needed the proper guidance from trained professionals to help "draw" them out. Drama can also create a positive focus and outlet for extroverted children as well as build their diction, projection and articulation skills.   Myth: Drama takes a significant time commitment in order for a child to excel. Fact: Just one hour of drama class per week throughout the school year, using the right drama program will create significant noticeable differences in speech, creative thinking and confidence in public speaking.   ABOUT DRAMA KIDS
Drama Kids of East Montgomery County is part of the largest after-school drama program in the world, with more than 45,000 students currently at its 1,000 plus locations both in the United States and internationally. Its copyrighted curriculum features original, creative lessons with a built-in advancing scale of language development that enables students of different ages and abilities to relate to the program and progress at a their own rate.   Its curriculum differs significantly from traditional drama programs, with an emphasis on activities that focus on verbal dynamics, creative movement and dialogue development.
Drama Kids of East Montgomery County offers age-appropriate classes for students ages 5 through 17 years old. Classes meet once each week for one hour at locations throughout Montgomery County.  The program is designed to allow new enrollment throughout the year, space permitting. Drama Kids also offers Summer Camp and an In School program that brings its innovative curriculum directly into the classroom. For more information, contact 410-531-9490.
It's INCREDIBLE
I want to thank DRAMA KIDS, especially CAROLYN PARKER, for the amazing work and the difference they make in a child's life, MY CHILD'S LIFE.
Luis is part of his school chorus as well as the Church Chorus, before your classes he would just stand there mumbling words, now I can cry hearing his voice singing, especially when he sang at Honor Chorus for Montgomery County.
It's INCREDIBLE.
He has been amazing me and the Teachers with the amount of self-esteem, confidence that your classes have given him.
Thank you DRAMA KIDS.
After One Day!
Sarah had a great time at camp today. Sarah said that usually she is afraid to be silly and funny because she feels self-conscious, so she enjoyed being with other kids who were doing the same thing, in a place where it felt okay to act up. Best wishes for a great [camp] week.
About camp
We loved it! The end-of-camp presentation was so much fun. My usually shy 9-year-old can't wait to come back!
Thank you so much!
Thank you, Carolyn, so much for the wonderful job that you did with our kids! I thought the play was adorable, so upbeat, and all the kids did great! But I was most excited to see how my own kid did, of course!!! I was amazed at how he did what he did, remembered what he had to do, laughed while he did it, and looked out at the audience. I was thrilled!!! This is exactly what I never thought he would be able to do, and did it. How sweet. I mean a lot of those kids are outgoing anyway, but not Andrei. So thank you so much!
Confidence gained...
Thanks for all your hard work with the kids. Mary Frances loved the spring production. Since she started drama she has grown dramatically in many ways. She is more social and more accepting of her school mates, and she has become much more confident at school. She had to do a report on Italy and she decided her presentation would be a skit that she wrote and performed herself! Most others stood up there with poster board, so it was really fun to watch. Thanks again!
The Big Debut
That was so much fun last night!! What a great job all of the kids did under your direction and guidance! Thank you so much! I'm a weeper and thought for sure that I would cry at Ryan's big debut but it was so cute and entertaning I forgot to! Thanks so much!!
On spring production...
Thank you so much for such a wonderful special night! Meghan had a blast and it is so much fun to see her get so excited about something!! Can't wait for your summer camp!! Great job!
Nice Touch!
It was a wonderful performance tonight. I just wanted to let you know how happy Carter was after the play. It also meant a lot to receive the trophy. Nice touch!
The Show Must Go On!
Thank you for all your hard work! Amanda loved the class and looked forward to it each week. the play was adorable and such a treat to see. Everyone loved it!
Just wanted to let you know that there was a music show at Amanda's elementary school this week.. One of the kids who had a big part ended up being absent the day of the show. They asked Amanda to be the understudy about 15 min. before the show and she filled in with no rehearsal at all--simply heard the child practicing his lines throughout the week and had learned them that way. Anyhow, she performed the show twice that day--saying the lines loudly and confidently skipping across the stage acting out the part of the porcupine. I believe she did such a great job in large part because of the confidence she gained and skills she learned through your class. She was so proud of herself and, of course, we were so proud of her. Thank you so much for your hard work and the amazing job you did with all the kids this year. We really appreciate it! You're a wonderful teacher and we will highly recommend DK to our friends.