Why do parents choose to send their children to the Hebrew Day School? Some current and former parents tell us why.
Elaine M (alumni parent):
"HDS is excellent preparation for middle school, high school and beyond. It offers a top-notch challenging academic curriculum combined with unique individual attention in a loving and caring environment. It provides an excellent background and foundation in Judaics, culture, traditions, and the Hebrew language."
"The help and personal attention our son got from the HDS teachers made him able to get an exceptionally high score in the MEAP in 6th grade, even in English, after only one year of being in the United States."
Michael and Donnalee F
"The standard of education is very high and the children are nurtured, not only academically, but also emotionally"
Rich and Myra K
"The school is the perfect size: big enough that he has plenty of social stimulation and opportunities like the band, the string ensemble, and chess club, but small enough that it's still a tight-knit community that truly knows and adores him."
Andriena and Ricardo S
"The first day I walked into HDS, I felt that this was the place I wanted for my children, not only because of the religion, but also because of the warm sense of community that you can breathe."
Debbie Z
"With an HDS education, Brayan understands Jewish thought and text as a rich resource for many Jews from a variety of backgrounds."
Amy H (current parent):
"When our son Jonathan was two, my husband David was convinced to go to a Gan open house by another HDS parent, whose kids were currently enrolled at the school. When he got back, there was no more discussion. He felt that the Judaics curriculum of the Gan was lovely, but also that the secular curriculum was fascinating, creative, innovative and exciting. We chose HDS for two main reasons. First, we didn't want our children to perceive their Judaism as an add-on, a burden or something that differentiates them from other kids, but rather an integral part of who we are as a family and as individuals. But we also chose HDS because we felt that the curriculum across the board - both secular and Judaic - was outstanding. I feel that my kids are getting one of the most dynamic general educations available in Ann Arbor. And I know that they will grow up comfortable in their religion, strong in their convictions and confident of who they are."
Joan H (alumni parent):
"At HDS, every staff member and every teacher knew my children and made them feel welcome. My kids loved to go to school and they came home singing (and are still singing the same songs). At HDS my children became compulsive readers. They developed leadership skills through the student council. The many school performances helped them overcome a natural shyness and they can now talk, sing and act in public. They are lovers of language and anxious to explore new languages now that they are fairly fluent in Hebrew. The staff responded to my children's needs and interests and provide enrichment materials to them at every stage of their development. Some parents say to me that they don't want their child to attend a day school because it doesn't reflect the 'real world.' I say to them that their children will have many future opportunities to attend school in the wider world, but little future opportunity to become fluent in Hebrew, to learn Hebrew songs and become comfortable with Jewish prayers and holidays almost as part of their DNA. Moreover, their children will not function well in the real world as Jews if they are not secure in their own identity, heritage and culture. With the strong foundation that they obtained at HDS, my children are well prepared to meet the many challenges ahead."
Rachel B (current parent):
"My two older children have opposite learning styles, and I am amazed at how the staff and curriculum manage to meet both of their needs. When special learning needs surfaced for one, the school team responded quickly, found unique ways to accommodate her needs, and provided individual attention that has helped her to thrive."
Barbara K (current parent):
"I originally sent my kids to HDS because of the excellent full-day kindergarten and the chance for them to learn a second language. The school provides a very caring environment where everyone knows each other and kids from different grades interact and play together. The Hebrew immersion program is excellent - and my third grader really understands and can read Hebrew quite fluently. It's really a wonderful community and very tolerant of a very wide range of levels of observance."
Dennie C (current parent):
"I didn't feel part of a Jewish community as a child, and my husband and I wanted something different for our children. At HDS our son, and indeed our whole family, is part of a community. He and his classmates live the Jewish cycle of holidays each year and he is comfortable with and knowledgeable about his Jewish heritage - and very proud of his Hebrew!"
Audrey N (alumni parent):
"I liked the warm atmosphere. I wanted my children to learn more Hebrew. I wanted them to learn Jewish music. I think it is good for them to learn more about the holidays by living them. I liked the idea of a community school where all types of Jews - Conservative, Reform, Orthodox, Reconstructionist, secular, Israeli and humanistic - can all be together and learn together and learn to get along with each other."
Angie C (alumni parent):
"Families at HDS come from a wide spectrum of religious and cultural Jewish identification. When we first enrolled our daughter at HDS, we were 'unaffiliated' and did not belong to any synagogue or Jewish group. We were completely comfortable at the school. HDS promotes respect for everyone."
Roby C (alumni parent):
"HDS has allowed us and our kids to make lasting friendships. It is a small school but everyone is very warm and welcoming like one big happy family.