Social science researchers suggest that around thirty percent of the population regularly experience the intense feelings of self-consciousness and shame associated with the experience of shyness.
For children, shyness can be especially painful and intense because of limits on their ability to filter and balance shy feelings against other, more positive social experiences. Shyness in children and teens can transform a classroom into an amplifier for self-criticism and negative thoughts, and an event like a piano recital into a dreaded nightmare anticipated weeks before the event.
"My whole childhood seemed like a series of painful social moments and mistakes," one young adult described of her shyness, "I always felt like I was broken in some way."
Follow Us
Sign up for our FREE Newsletter
Parent Resources
Parenting Books/Programs
Find: Books - Programs Parenting Styles Family Building Kids-Teens &amp; Media Child Development Play Baby Care Toddlers &amp; Preschoolers School Age Children Teenagers Puberty Behavior &amp; Discipline Child Psychology Self-esteem Socialization ADD - ADHD Anxiety Issues Autism &amp; Aspergers Depression &amp; Bipolar Disorder Drugs &amp; Alcohol Eating Disorders Learning Styles Study Skills-Homework Language Arts Math - Science Reading Improvement Social Studies Learning Disabilities Dyslexia Gifted Learners Child-Teen Health Child-Teen-Family Fitness Nutrition &amp; Family Meals Weight Management Pregnancy-Delivery Marriage-Divorce-Single Parenting
The information on this website is solely for informational purposes. IT IS NOT INTENDED TO PROVIDE MEDICAL ADVICE. Neither Child Development Institute, LLC nor Dr. Myers nor any of the editors, columnists or authors take responsibility for any possible consequences from any action taken which results from reading or following the information contained in this information. The publication of this information does not constitute the practice of medicine or psychology, and this information does not replace the advice of your physician or mental health care provider. Before undertaking any course of treatment, the reader must seek the advice of their physician or other health care provider. See additional information .
Copyright © 1999- 2012 Child Development Institute,LLC All Rights Reserved