links and resouces for all aspects of homeschooling – in Indiana and throughout the nation ihen staff
While we don't have concrete answers or advice - other than to encourage our fellow citizens (be they home educators OR not!) to become pro-active in becoming/staying informed about the subject(s) – and learning the Constitutions (state and U.S.) – here are some web sites that may be of help on the matter.
Special thanks to Eric, the Power Poster. :-)
IHEN-LegalEagles E-list on YahooGroups
IHEN's Legal Eagles e-list is the online community where discussing politics is the norm; especially if the politics is about home education in Indiana.
This list is an opportunity for homeschoolers involved in custody issues to contact other homeschoolers for information about homeschooling attorneys and experts, as well as exchange ideas and information about handling custody disputes as a result of homeschooling.
As a result of numerous inquiries, AHSA was formed by Linda J. Conrad, an attorney and then the Legal/Legislative Chair of the HomeSchool Association of California, and other attorney members of HSC. Because of the national interest in this network, it is open to attorneys and experts nationwide.
AHSA is a network of attorneys and legal experts that concerned with litigation pending and threatened against homeschoolers. Its primary purpose is to exchange legal information within the profession, and to educate and support attorneys and experts involved in homeschool litigation.
A referral list of attorneys and legal experts is maintained at http://www.ahsa-usa.org. Since specific factual situations can change the legal advise given, logging on to the AHSA-USA list or the AHSA-USA Homeschooling and Custody list does not create an attorney-client relationship with AHSA-USA, any member of AHSA-USA, or any attorney responding to questions on this list, and AHSA-USA recommends that an attorney be consulted for legal advise pertaining to specific situations.
This list is an opportunity for homeschoolers to contact homeschooling attorneys and experts about homeschooling legal and litigation issues. It is an informal network of attorneys and legal experts that are concerned with litigation pending and threatened against homeschoolers. Its primary purpose is to exchange legal information within the profession, and to educate and support attorneys and experts involved in homeschool litigation. A referral list of attorneys and legal experts may be maintained.
Since specific factual situations can change the legal advise given, logging on to the AHSA-USA list does not create an attorney-client relationship with AHSA-USA, any member of AHSA-USA, or any attorney responding to questions on this list, and AHSA-USA recommends that an attorney be consulted for legal advise pertaining to specific situations.
Pacific Justice Institute
Pacific Justice Institute is a non-profit 501(c)(3) legal defense organization specializing in the defense of religious freedom, parental rights, and other civil liberties. Pacific Justice Institute works diligently, without charge, to provide their clients with all the legal support they need.
Pacific Justice Institute's strategy is to coordinate and oversee large numbers of concurrent court actions through a network of over 1,000 affiliate attorneys nationwide. And, according to former United States Attorney General Edwin Meese, "The Institute fills a critical need on the West Coast for those whose civil liberties are threatened."
The Rutherford Institute
Founded in 1982 by constitutional attorney and author John W. Whitehead, The Rutherford Institute is a civil liberties organization that provides free legal services to people whose constitutional and human rights have been threatened or violated.
The Rutherford Institute has emerged as one of the nation's leading advocates of civil liberties and human rights, litigating in the courts and educating the public on a wide spectrum of issues affecting individual freedom in the United States and around the world.
The Institute's mission is twofold: to provide legal services in the defense of religious and civil liberties and to educate the public on important issues affecting their constitutional freedoms.
Whether our attorneys are protecting the rights of parents whose children are strip-searched at school, standing up for a teacher fired for speaking about religion or defending the rights of individuals against illegal search and seizure, The Rutherford Institute offers assistance-and hope-to thousands.