What is the READY! Program?
READY! for Kindergarten is an educational program for parents that was developed by the Kennewick School District and is administered by the National Children's Reading Foundation. As parents, you want your children to have a happy and successful learning experience. Often parents wonder what a typical 5-year-old knows, or should know, the first day of school. There are readiness skills called Kindergarten Targets . They are not requirements, but learning goals. Children who are taught these skills at home get off to a great start at school. They start ahead and stay ahead, year after year.
The goal of the READY! for Kindergarten program is to provide information to parents about how your child learns at each age level, along with essential "tools" and activities that you can do together to make learning easy and fun! If you have young children at home (newborn to age 5), we encourage you to sign up for our classes to ensure that your child will continue to enjoy learning later.
Parent or legal guardian of children birth to five years of age who live within the boundaries of the Sumner School District.
Out of District Participants
Out of District participants pay $50 per class either by mail or at the door. (Materials paid for by the district may only be provided free to Sumner School District taxpayers.)
Who may attend?
A parent or legal guardian (proof of guardianship may be required). One additional adult may attend with you to "audit" the class, such as a spouse, grandparent, or friend, but only one set of learning materials will be provided per child. Please come 5-10 minutes early to sign in and get your name tag. Grandparents or other family members providing full-time child care, call the READY! office.
First-Time Enrollee?
Get your basic materials by attending the "Intro to READY!" mini-class which is held 30 minutes before the regular class begins. Sign up for both classes the first time you attend.
We hope you find this summer activity calendar a useful tool for staying active and involved with your child's learning over the summer. Dates for Pierce County Library programs, City of Sumner, and City of Bonney Lake community events have been added to the calendar as well.
To view these files, you will need the Adobe Acrobat Reader that now comes with many Web browsers. If you do not have Acrobat Reader, you can download it for free from the Adobe Web site. Go to the Acrobat download page.