Toddler + | Infant & toddler development
Top 10 tips to your child's first day at school
Starting school for the first time can be tough for mum and child, so why not try these simple tips to help make things a little easier...
If you are about to send your little one off to school for the first time, here are some great tips from Hilary Pereira involved in the recent book "Getting Ready to Start School", in association with Netmums , to help make those first steps happy, safe and most importantly - memorable!
1. Familiarise your child with the school Make sure your child is familiar with the school he's going to be starting. If he hasn't had a chance to formally visit, or take part in an induction day, try to attend events such as summer fairs, so that he can take a look around. It's a good idea to try out the school run at least a few times, too.
2. Read relevant books together Take a look at some relevant books together, to find out how characters in stories cope with starting school. For example, I am Too Absolutely Small for School by Lauren Child; Starting School by Janet Ahlberg; and When and Elephant Comes to School by Jan Omerod.
3. Chat to your child about school Be chatty and positive about the start of school, and encourage your child to talk about it if he's anxious. Don't overwhelm him with talk, though.
4. Teach your child basic skills Teach your child the basic skills he'll need at school, if he doesn't have them already. This means using the loo on his own (and being able to ask when he needs it); washing his hands; getting dressed and undressed for PE; and using cutlery if he's to have school dinners. Don't fret about stuff like pencil skills and counting: he'll learn that when he gets there.
5. Practice leaving your child with someone close to you If you've never spent a whole day apart, give your child several practise runs in doing so, by arranging for him to spend time with a relative or good friend.
6. Introduce them to other classmates beforehand Try to arrange playdates with some of the children due to start school at the same time - it will be a great advantage if he has at least one pal in his class. If you don't know anyone, schools are usually happy to help you make contact with other families. A get-together in the park in the weeks leading up to the new term is a great way to establish a few friendships - for you as well as your child.
7. Get uniform plenty in advance Get any uniform your child needs sorted well in advance. Labelling everything is absolutely crucial as teachers are driven mad by lost property!
8. Get into a good routine Try to get into the swing of a good routine at least a week or two in advance of starting school. Bring bedtime forward to a sensible time, if you need to, and start setting the alarm for an early start if you don't already. School mornings can be a major rush, so give yourself plenty of time (and do as much as possible to prepare the night before.)
9. Show your child positivity When the big day arrives, help your child cope with nerves by showing him how positive you are (even if you feel like crying yourself!) Say good-bye and be firm about leaving - most teachers will prefer it if you don't hang around. If you've nothing in particular to be getting on with, go for a coffee and chat with some other mums.
10. Take a picture! Don't forget to take a photograph of your child on his first day at school. It's a momentous event, after all!
When your child grows up, you should make sure that he/ she attends a good institution. It is so difficult now to get admission in high profile colleges; the competition is really getting tougher. Interestingly, many institutes offer online courses too. So getting enrolled in information security masters degree online is not difficult.
You seem to have quite extensive knowledge about school and education. I was wondering if you could recommend me a good college where I can get a healthcare administration degree . I would really appreciate your advice. Hope you can help me. Looking forward to hearing from you back. Thank you.
The tips are great. But remember that it is okay for your kid to be nervous. It is even better if he is confident and happy about first day. But do not force him for anything, or do not scold him. Education as a whole is much more accessible now. A friend of mine recently finished her human services degree online .
I think that kids today are not as anxious as I was when I started school. I just graduated from my masters in public health online and I could say that I'm probably more anxious than first graders. What do you think? How do you feel?
First day at school would always remain an unforgettable experience for both your kid and you. So follow these tips and encourage your kid; after all he/ she is going to start learning. In fact the more he/she grows up the more specialized his/her education becomes. There are highly specialized institute now which offer special training program. For example Tucson CDL School provides training for truck driving.