The article below was written by a homeschool Mom for her homeschool support group in Louisiana. It is specific to Louisiana but contains much general homeschooling information as well. We hope it will be useful to you. If you wish to visit the author's personal web site, please go to:  http://www.sandrasbackyard.bravepages.com (This article is periodically updated by the author at that site.)    (This is the August, 1999 version)
So w ho am I to tell you how to homeschool? Well, I can tell you who I am, but nobody should tell you how to homeschool. All of the information below is just my personal opinion about the various subjects, based on  my own years of homeschooling two children (since 1991). Neither of my children have ever been in a traditional school setting. Homeschool is our tradition. If you don't care what I used, just skip this part. :-)
This article began as part of our local support group's homeschool packet, which was given freely to anyone who asked. As time went on, it grew until we felt the need to "do it up right". Eventually, it became a booklet which is occasionally revised, the last being today (8/99). And now it's online. :-) Hope you find it useful as you travel the homeschool road.
In case you're interested in what we have used over the years--we've used everything! :-) I started to write them down and looked at the list and thought, wow! Would I be confused reading this! So I started over. Below is the result. Hope it's understandable.
For Preschool I used Sonlight's preschool packet and Rod and Staff's preschool books. Excellent! For First Grade for Kati I used Calvert . If I had it to do over, I think I would continue with Calvert as it was a good program, easy to use, and comprehensive though it only goes through 8th grade. At the time, I had all the enthusiasm of a new homeschool Mom and we were often ahead in one subject and behind in others, making it hard to use the teacher manual efficiently.
One year we used Margie Gray's Prairie Primer, which is based on the Little House books, really fun! If you enjoy unit studies this is a great one, particularly for the little prairie ladies in the house!
For Math, we've used Saxon for most grades. I've also tried A Beka , which was good but moved too fast for my daughter. On the other hand Saxon moves a little slow for my son. &lt;sigh&gt;  We've also tried Fun Math and Miquon Math, and have used Switched on Schoolhouse with some Key to Fraction, Percent, and Decimals thrown in. This year we're back to Saxon. However, for Algebra I I have found the most wonderful video series by Keyboard Enterprises. It is not fancy but the instructor goes slowly, explaining everything as though you know nothing - which is what a lot of non-Math majors need!
For Science we have mostly used A Beka , but one year (3rd) we did Eagles Wings, which was good but it's basically a one year text. Science is not my strong point and these books are clear and thorough once you get past the simple books in the early grades. note: I am planning to get a Chemistry video from The Teaching Company for next year.
For History/Geography, we've used A Beka, Bob Jones , Teaching Company videos, Geosafari, map skill books, Highlights Which Way USA and another Highlights series that was for countries - can't recall the name but they send you a puzzle book about different countries every month or so. Kati loved it. I might note that History is also not my strong point.
For Language Arts we have used a variety of things since Language encompasses so many aspects--reading, spelling, grammar etc. We began with A Beka, which was great for the early grades. Then the worksheets got too "crowded" and hard to correct for me. I have bad vision, wear bifocals and need something less "claustrophobic" so to speak. We've used ' Wordly Wise, Analogies and Megawords by EPS , Creative Writing, Wordsmith, Word Roots, Easy Grammar, Daily Grams, Learning Language Arts Through Literature, and Learning English through the Bible. :-) These were all good. I still use some of them. The Wordly Wise 3000 series is preferred by most over the old series.  This year I'm using Highway to English for high school, from Weaver, but I have been disappointed in the number of errors we have found. I am pleased with its use of the Bible for the diagramming but think it needs another printing overhaul.
For Bible, I have used various things through the years, one of my favorites being Precept Ministries Line Upon Line for Genesis and John. My daughter belongs to a Bible study group which meets once a week, In addition to Sunday School Bible studies, she also has AWANA Bible studies. My son also attends AWANA and is doing much better this year in Bible memory and, in fact, everything. :-) I am using the Explorer Bible Study on Genesis this year with him. We are reading Genesis, a chapter a week, and discussing each. I read the comments in the high school book, which we use in our discussions, among other references.
For Foreign Language I've used The Learnables and Power-Glide . This year we began with Alpha Omega Spanish (SOS) but have decided to go with an online tutorial first - Study Spanish. The student can send his/her grades to the teacher via e-mail.
In addition to the above, they've taken art lessons and I've bought lots of teach yourself art books which they enjoy. Kati has taken piano lessons and is presently taking violin. We've used the Critical Thinking Press books like Mindbenders, Dr. Doriddle, Thinkagrams. I just love those!
I've used the Ed Hirsch books on occasion. We just sit down and read through them, asking questions to see if we've covered a topic sufficiently.
Did I say I used everything? Well, as you can see, just about. :-) I've also tried the PACE and ACE books from Alpha Omega and School of Tomorrow respectively, but it never really worked out for us.
So what would I do over if I could do it over? Although I have really enjoyed tasting the various things out there and there are sooo many wonderful things--there are only 24 hours in a day. I think I would stick with Calvert through 8th grade, particularly for my son who likes to know just what he has to do for that day. Since I am currently working in high school, it is hard to say but I think I am definitely pleased with the Algebra video from Keyboard Enterprises . I also liked  Wordsmith for Creative Writing and for thinking skills, Critical Thinking Press has anything you could want. :-) The rest, I'm still thinking. :-) Of course, everything is 20/20 in hindsight, right?
The results? My kids have done well on standardized tests and our school runs pretty smoothly - most of the time.
There are many reasons why people decide to homeschool. You may be disillusioned by the public and/or private school system you’ve been involved with. You may begin homeschooling for religious reasons —to integrate your belief in God into your curriculum. You may do it for financial reasons. You can't afford private school and don't want to send your children to public school. You may want to protect your children from exposure to the violence and drugs sadly present within today's school systems. You may want to strengthen your family life. You may feel that through homeschooling your children will get a better education, academically, socially, and spiritually. You may simply feel that this is what God is leading you to do.
Are these good reasons? Sure they are! Every family should have the right to decide the hows, whys and wherefores of their children's upbringing. Your reasons are your own. You can choose to share them. You can choose to join with other like-minded families for support. You can choose to keep them to yourself. The greatest thing about homeschooling is choice . You have such a multitude of choices and they are all yours to make. Do you have to make them alone? No! You have information as close as your state and local support group and your library. Of course the final decision must be yours. Both parents should agree, whatever the decision.
Commitment is essential to successful homeschooling. Do you have a commitment to your children's education?. Do you have a need that homeschooling can meet? I'm not asking if you're smart enough, or if your kids listen to you—do you really want to do it?
If the answer is "yes" then I would say give it a try. Even if you decide later that you want to put your kids back into a private or public school, both you and they will have benefited from the experience, if in no other way than to appreciate the tough job that teachers have.
Why do people sometimes decide not to homeschool, or give up after one year? One reason might be that they need to have two incomes. While it is possible to homeschool when both parents work, it is more difficult. Another reason might be a lack of confidence in their ability to teach their children or make their children do their lessons. With experience and a firm hand, this problem usually takes care of itself. If you have young children who do not show the proper respect for you as a parent, then they will not do so when you are their teacher. However, that doesn't mean that you should not homeschool. On the contrary, they need to learn this most important lesson now !
Another reason people quit homeschooling is because it takes so much time and energy. There are books on organizing yourself that can help here, if you can find the time to read them. There is even one called How to Get Organized When You Don't Have the Time by Stephanie Culp.
There are people out there who do not understand homeschooling, or who, for some reason, oppose it. There will undoubtedly be pressure from many sources to put your children into "real school" meaning the public or private school system. Keep your sights on your original reasons for homeschooling. Make your commitment and stand by your convictions. The benefits will far outweigh the problems. As violence in the schools escalates, more and more people are choosing this method of educating their children. Perhaps in due time there will be less opposition and more understanding.
Always remember when you run into problems that someone else has probably had the same problem and may even have found a solution. Contact another homeschooler in your group or bring it up at a meeting!
In a word, yes. Homeschooling is legal in all fifty states. Different states have different regulations and you should know the regulations for your state. In Louisiana, you can register as a home study family or you can register as a private school. More information on these options can be obtained from the Home School Legal Defense Association, CHEF of Louisiana, your local support group, or your state or local school board. Remember that officials are not always familiar with homeschooling. There are some places where the school officials are not aware that homeschooling is, indeed, legal. If this concerns you, join the Home School Legal Defense Association or consult a local support group for information about your area.
How should you begin? First, read this information. Then read more. I have a booklist to give you a starting point. Read at least a few to get a feel for what you will be doing. There has been an explosion of homeschooling books since I originally wrote this, so check your local library for recent editions.
Parents, discuss homeschooling and what it will mean to your family. Both parents should agree that homeschooling is what you want to do before you actually begin. You need to be supportive of one another.
I n most cases, Mom is the Teacher and Dad functions as Principal though it may happen that your circumstances are different. Sometimes, Dad will help in a subject he is particularly knowledgeable about. However Dad, if Mom asks for your help with something you find easy, please don’t insinuate that she’s not so smart if she needs help. Then again, Mom, don’t ask Dad to tackle a Science project after working a 16 hr shift. Put it on the back burner until he has time to work with your children.
God has given each of us skills and knowledge that are useful in our own circumstances. In this age when some families are having children later in life, it may have been quite some time since you tackled algebra. That doesn’t mean you can’t do it. It just means you may have to work harder or ask for help, or maybe use a video or an older homeschool student as tutor.
Remember that these are not HER kids or HIS kids. They are YOUR kids—both of you. Dad, be patient if it takes a little longer to get the house in order with little ones underfoot all day every day. Moms, try not to take it personally if Dad forgets himself and comments about maybe pulling out the vacuum or making room to walk on the floor around the made-to-scale replica of the Mayflower.
No one person can do it all. There are lesson plans, teaching, correcting, discipline, watching the little ones who are not being schooled, doing the laundry, dishes, and housecleaning. In some households, the wife pays the bills and takes care of the household repairs, calling repairmen and overseeing their work. The teacher will usually accompany her charges on field trips where, remember, she has all her children—different ages, some of whom may not be as interested in what's going on as others. All these things have to get done but Mom, you don't have to do them all personally, and they don't have to all be done every single day. Pace yourself. I also recommend not killing yourself on the weekend playing catch up. Sure, make certain you have clean towels and dishes but remember to take a break, too.
Besides the actual physical work of teaching, you will also be worrying . Are you doing it right? Are the kids really learning? Do they "hate" you because you've given a difficult assignment or given them extra work for not paying attention? Well, maybe. But didn't they "hate" you before you started homeschooling when you said they couldn't have those $60 blue jeans? That's just part of being a parent. Kids need limits. They need somebody to say no to them. Who? Someone who cares about them. Someone who loves them. Someone who cares enough to keep them away from outside influences that might disrupt that fine balance you've created with them before they became "school-age."
Now, you've read so much about homeschooling that you'll scream if you hear the word again. Well, not quite that bad! What’s the next step? Make the decision. To homeschool or not to homeschool. Prayerfully consider all you've learned. Do you have the support of your mate? Don't try to gather support from other sources. Your parents, your church family, friends will all have their opinions. However, the important people here are you, your spouse, your kids. It is not up to the children to make this decision but they should be included in the decision making process and their thoughts and opinions should be taken seriously.
If you are a two salary family now, you will probably be a one salary family when you begin homeschooling. It is possible to school your children for as little or as much as you can afford. Still, the loss of that second income is going to hurt. You will now be purchasing textbooks (possibly for several children your first year) where before their school supplied these. Of course you paid for them in taxes but this is different. You still have to pay taxes, but you also have to get books. This is a sacrifice. Think about it. Weigh it.
Sometimes you can borrow materials. In Louisiana, if your parish has a textbook depository you can borrow current materials (those actually being used in the schools at that time) by leaving a deposit of 50% of their worth. (Note that workbooks would have to be purchased.) This money is returned at the end of the year when you return the books.
When should you begin formal lessons? Of course, I have already said that we begin informally teaching our children from the time they are born. When you should start formal education is to a degree a matter of personal preference. Except for the age requirements of your state the decision is yours. If you are a gung ho person and can't wait to begin, go ahead and do it. Read, Will Early Education Ruin Your Child? by Richard Fugate. Read Teaching Preschoolers by Ruth Beechick. Read Never Too Early by Doreen Claggett. You can get craft and activity books, maybe a home computer, puzzles and lots of drawing paper, crayons, markers and scissors. You don't have to buy everything. If you are imaginative and creative, you can make a lot of materials for use with preschoolers.
If, on the other hand, you see that your child is just enjoying being a child, and doesn't seem interested in formal learning yet, is not bothered by the fact that his peers are reading and being schooled, and it doesn't bother you, put it off and wait. You’re not harming your child by adjusting to the needs of your family and particular situation. Those authors who advocate later schooling insist that the older child will rapidly catch up to those who began early, and may even be more eager and easier to teach. It just all depends on your child.
That covers when to begin homeschooling but what about your school year? Can you go to Grandma's for her birthday and skip school? Sure! Just be sure that at the end of the year you have the number of days the state requires—in Louisiana this is 180 days. If you follow the public school year closely, this might mean that you teach on a Saturday or take a shorter Christmas or Easter break.
Some folks school all year so they can take time off during the regular term and go on vacation at a less crowded time of year or have shorter school days or weeks during the year. One might choose to school 4 days and always having Fridays off (or for project work) or perhaps Dad has an unusual work schedule and you want to follow that. Perhaps there is a scheduled medical procedure or treatments that you need to plan around. Once again, the choice is yours so long as you follow the state regulations as to number of days. Remember that you need to check your own state‘s laws as state requirements vary.
Anywhere! Well, obviously it will be at home for the most part. You can use your kitchen table, add a schoolroom onto your house or convert an extra room. It's very convenient if you have a special room or space to school in since, all your materials would be in one place. However, if you built or purchased your home before you decided to homeschool, this may not be possible. I would suggest that once you get settled into a "routine" you use the same location for school so that it takes on a "gotta do" feeling. It's not something we'll do "if we have time." It's a responsibility you must meet.
There are different methods of schooling as well as different types of curricula. You already know about correspondence courses, video school, computer or online curriculum etc. No you can decide if you like the Classical Approach, the Principle Approach or Unit Study. You can use hardcover texts or consumable worktexts.
John Holt advocates "unschooling." Read John Holt's books on the book list. Richard Fugate advocates early learning as do Charlotte Mason and Doreen Claggett. Read Fugate's Will Early Education Ruin Your Child ? and Claggett's Never Too Early . You may be able to find a reprint of Charlotte Mason's materials also. Raymond and Dorothy Moore advocate beginning formal schooling at a later age. They have had a number of books published.
Some people choose a very relaxed school atmosphere. Some like to "have school at home." Some even wear uniforms to give a school-like feeling. Most go somewhere in between the two extremes. Whatever works and keeps your children interested in learning is the best way to go.
Attached to this article is a beginning list of suppliers and curricula publishers. You can also read Mary Prides ' Big Book of Home Learning or Cathy Duffy's Christian Home Educators' Curriculum Manual. If you write to some of the places listed you will get on somebody's mailing list and start to get all sorts of catalogs. All you have to do is write for those things in which you are really interested. Many of these places have web sites where you can go to get more information.
Another way to find out about good curricula is to ask friends and people who have used it. People who have used something usually don't mind sharing with you their feelings about it and whether it worked for them and why. The why is important because maybe their children have different learning styles than yours have.
Lots of magazines offer reviews of curricula. Try out a few magazines and find the ones that meet your needs. Homeschooling Today and The Teaching Home are two but there are many other good ones. This gives you both ideas and encouragement from fellow homeschoolers that you can go to again and again if you feel overwhelmed or in need of advice.
Once again remember that used books are available. Support groups sometimes get together for a used book sale. Also some mail order companies, such as Rainbow ReSource take used materials for resale.
Go to conventions. Sometimes the organizers will allow families just like yours to bring their used materials to sell. Best of all, at a convention you can see the materials before purchasing. You can ask questions about them and get prices. You’ll probably get lots of free catalogues, too. You can basically learn what's out there. Sometimes you can pick up a bargain. There are usually workshops on different subjects and the speakers can help you with problems you may be having as well as give the good or bad points of a particular curriculum.
After you've looked at your options—correspondence course, unit study, mishmash of different publishers, video classes—make that decision and go for it. You will need to plan differently depending on what choice you make, but with every choice you will need to allow for shipping time of your materials. The summer is the busiest time for curriculum dealers so keep this in mind and expect slower response during this time. Most of the large dealers, and many smaller ones, have toll free numbers for ordering. They pay for this so please don't abuse the privilege by using toll free numbers when you only want information. Many of these dealers are families just like yours who found a need and sought to fill it and get some additional income to help defray their own homeschooling expenses. Don’t forget to check the ‘net. Many dealers are now, as I said earlier, online. You can get information and sometimes even order online if you choose to do so. This is an excellent way to compare what’s available. Briefly, if you chose correspondence study with the school doing the grading and record keeping for you, your job will be simple. You teach the lessons as per the teacher manuals. Many include specific lesson plans and most include a "scope and sequence" that tells what your child should learn at each grade level. You send tests and project papers that are graded by a certified teacher and they keep the records. In some cases they will also deal with the school board should you have any difficulties in that area. In 1999, correspondence courses ran anywhere from $250-$600 per child depending on the options you choose.
If you choose video school, you have even less to do. A Beka , for example, offers video classes. These are video classes of their own teachers in their physical school in Florida. Students feel as if they are part of the class and are given homework and projects and assignments just as though they would be in class. This is more expensive, currently about $800/year, plus shipping charges to send the tapes back. You have a specified amount of time to complete the course. Of course, the assigned course-work must be returned so you don’t have as much flexibility in deciding to do or not do work.
Another option has recently opened up. Computer curriculum. That means you purchase computer courses which you install on your computer at home and your children do the work directly on the computer. My children are currently using Switched On Schoolhouse , Alpha Omega’s computer curriculum. They offer the 5 basic subjects—Math, Bible, Language Arts, Science and History/Geography. You can buy all of them as a set for a specific grade level, or just one or two. If your child is working at different grade levels in each subject, you can buy just what you need. For any other subjects you want to teach, you must use an alternate method. The computer makes a work schedule based on the calendar you set up, which can be different for each child. It will tell the computer (and you) if the work is past due and what projects are being worked on. There are tests and grades are given for each unit. If you don’t think your child took the time to study for a test , you can delete it and have the child study and re-take it. All in all, I've been pleased with the program. There are a few "could do this better" things but you will find that in every program, unless you design it yourself.
There are also on-line courses available. This would mean you have to be connected (through a modem) to a web site where you would read the lesson and do the coursework. There may even be "chats" or e-mail options if you have questions.
Unit study is probably the cheapest way to go as far as textbook cost. You usually can purchase a manual and use it for all your children. You provide supplies and materials needed for activities. Sometimes the company will offer lessons plans already made up or videos on how to teach unit study or timelines to accompany the lessons. In some cases you may need additional math or phonics texts.
If you are choosing your own texts from different publishers you can decide what to cover when. There are many books to help you know what needs to be covered at approximately what age. In choosing a publisher you should consider whether you want to use hardcover texts or workbooks and which approach you want to follow. When your child gets to high school age you will want to be mindful of what credits he or she will need in case unforeseen circumstances force them to reenter the public system. (See below - Homeschool High School )
Now what if you decide to use one method and it isn't working for you? Are you a failure? Of course not! Drop it and go to something else. The important thing is that you and your children are comfortable with what you are doing and that you are all learning. You should check carefully, however, about refund policies if you are using correspondence or video. Be sure to give yourself and your children enough time to experience the curriculum before jumping to something else.
When you begin to homeschool, another thing you need to consider is testing. Do you intend to test your child using a standardized test at the end of the year? If you do, NOW is the time to get all your information. These tests should be ordered somewhat in advance. There are many tests from which to choose. One advantage of testing is that at renewal time you can simply send in your test results to the state. Some of the tests available include the CAT, Stanford, and Iowa. Sometimes students in a group can get together for testing if they are using the same grade tests. Some test providers have requirements for testers so you need to be aware of this before ordering. Some allow parents to administer tests under specific conditions.
Also, you may want to join the Home School Legal Defense Association . HSLDA, for a current fee of $100/year, will defend you against any accusations you may incur from the school board or child welfare, such as truancy or child neglect. If you are not teaching your own child, they will not accept you as they defend parents ' rights. If you are a member of a qualifying group, (ask your group leader), you get a discount of $15.00 on your HSLDA membership. HSLDA will send you the current laws of your state along with your renewal every year. They will also supply you with the current laws of any other state if you ask them. Perhaps you're thinking of moving and need to know the laws there.
I am by no means an expert in this field, but I thought I should mention it just so that you would understand that it is possible to homeschool even if your child has a learning disability. If you believe your child has a learning disability, the first thing to do is find out. Get a diagnosis. Once you have this information in hand, you can do your homework. Research, contact other homeschoolers and find out if anyone has dealt with the same problem you have and what materials worked best for them. Don't be too quick to label a child. Labels tend to stick and are sometimes wrongfully attached. The best place for a child who needs special help is obviously with the people who care the most about him—you, the parents. You know your child and his needs. Probably, you are the one who noticed the problem in the first place. Different disabilities require different strategies for teaching. You want to be challenging but not frustrating just as with any other child. Use your library to learn what the symptoms are—don't take your doctor's word only, though certainly don't ignore him. It may be a challenging prospect for both of you and you may need extra help, encouragement and prayer but, in all likelihood, you can do it.
When you begin to homeschool, another thing you need to consider is testing. Do you intend to test your child using a standardized test at the end of the year? If you do, now is the time to get all your information. These tests should be ordered somewhat in advance. There are many tests from which to choose. One advantage of testing is that in some states test scores are all you need to renew your application. Others require more. Some of the tests available include the CAT, Stanford, and Iowa. Sometimes students in a group can get together for testing if they are using the same grade tests. Some test providers have requirements for testers so you need to be aware of this before ordering. Research thoroughly. Ask other homeschool parents or your support group officers, what is accepted in your state.
Do you have to use standardized test? Not unless it's a requirement of your state. Most of the time, homeschool students do far better than average on the standardized test. However, there are many different thoughts as to how valuable the information you receive from these tests is. You decide whether you need this affirmation for yourself and also check to see if your state has a legal mandate that requires testing. Some correspondence schools will provide testing for you either as part of their program or for a separate fee.
What a scary thought--homeschooling a high school student! It has perhaps been a long time since you've looked at an Algebra or Chemistry book. It had been for me. Well, if you've been homeschooling since your child was in kindergarten, you've probably been learning right along with them. Even if you haven't, there are all kinds of helps for you out there. Videos are available from various places for the higher maths, like Algebra and Geometry. Teaching Company puts out some high quality courses. They also make videos for Chemistry, World History and American History on the high school level. Of course, there's also A Beka video school or correspondence school (videos are rented and must be returned), as well as the Switched on Schoolhouse. Bob Jones also has a video program where you subscribe and receive classroom instruction over satellite which you can videotape. Even if you use a video program, you must still do some correcting, making sure your child does the work required, make sure he/she is getting the information and understanding it etc. That's simplified, of course. You need to check with each of these to see just what they offer and if it would work for you regarding your schedule, your child and your finances.
If your child has trouble with a subject that you don't know a lot about, you might consider getting a tutor or changing which program you are using. Sometimes just hearing it a different way helps one to understand.
Now remember that this is HIGH SCHOOL. You need to be taking care of things like credits, records, transcripts and such. (I have some links below to help you.) Don't wait until you're almost finished to count up those credits. Think ahead. While in Junior High, you should be catching up on anything you missed during the previous years - get those math facts down, presidents, states and capitals and basic grammar etc. Then plan out what you and your child want to accomplish during the high school years. Is your child thinking along the lines of college? If there is even a chance that he/she will attend, you should plan a college oriented program. Once your child is well into the high school years, you will lose a lot of ground if he/she changes their mind and decides to go and you have not planned for it.
Here are some of the basic requirements for a college preparatory high school class. Remember that you need to check with your individual state to see what their actual requirements are. Also, if you are interested in scholarships, check their requirements too. This is ONLY a guide.
English - 4 credits - English includes not only grammar but also composition, vocabulary, analogies, possibly diagramming, and literature.
Note on English - Be sure your child is familiar with the classics - some Shakespeare, books like Jane Eyre, The Hiding Place, Little Women, Miracle Worker, 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, Moby Dick, Robinson Crusoe etc. There are lots of guides out there which will help you. If your child is a reader, he/she won't have any trouble at least reading some of these. If your child is a reluctant reader, at least get an abridged version or Illustrated Classic, or even a movie (you didn't hear me say that) so they can know what the stories are about. There are also several other Shakespeare plays on video. I enjoyed the Mel Gibson Hamlet and found it easy to understand, though using the Shakespearean language.
Math - 3-4 credits, which might include Algebra I, Geometry, Algebra II and possibly an Advanced Math, Trig, Calculus wouldn't hurt (non college bound might take Business Math or Consumer Math)
Science - 3-4 credits which might include Biology, Physical Science, Chemistry - you can also go on to Earth Science, Physics, Geology, Oceanography, Astronomy etc. if you really like Science and use these as electives. Some courses can be taken on two levels and earn two credits; for example, Biology I and Biology II, or Chemistry I and Chemistry II etc. as long as their is course level progression and not just a repeat of the original course.
Note: Labs are suggested. If you can't stomach any dissecting in your back yard, there are videos. :-)
Social Studies - 3-4 credits which should include American History, World History, Government (1/2 credit), Economics (1/2 credit), Civics (1/2 credit), World Geography, Free Enterprise (1/2 credit). State history should be taken at some point as well, possibly before high school. Remember that homeschooling is wonderfully adaptable to the study of "history", which is happening right around us. Free Enterprise, Economics, Government are all happening as we school. Elections are taking place, newspapers keep us abreast of current events, TV shows often will use historical references during their story lines, the History Channel, historical fiction etc., study of opinions versus facts, journalism vs. creative writing. Just make sure you cover all bases.
Foreign Language - at least 2 credits of the same course
P.E. - 2 credits required which might include 1/2 credit of Health, or ROTC might be substituted if allowed
Electives - Bible, music, art, drama, computer literacy, word processing which should include typing or if a child doesn't know how to type, typing could be a separate course), home economics, creative writing (writing fictional stories)
Throughout all of these should be thinking skills and critical thinking, and reading comprehension
Different states require different number of credits (or units) for graduation.
Most homeschoolers do not have a problem earning enough credits. They usually have more than enough because they are involved in so many extra courses.
When you have finished, or as you go along, you need to get together either an official transcript or a portfolio which will be shown to the college to which you are applying. Here are some links that had information on making a transcript. Check back later and I may be able to get the one I'm using (which I created myself following a sample format) online for downloading.
How to make a transcript (info on purchasing blank forms available from BJU) I did not check the BJU (Bob Jones University) site but they may have something there as well. http://www.efn.org/~hisnet/trans.html
If you homeschool throughout the high school years and buy books from different publishers your child will not get a diploma unless he takes the GED test or you make your own.. If you use the correspondence course of an actual school or become a satellite of another school, such as Christian Liberty Academy, you will get a diploma from them. Remember to research what credits your child will need when applying to college and to cover appropriate materials. When you prepare a transcript, use terms that would appear on a public school transcript.
Is it necessary to have an actual paper diploma? It's always nice to have a tangible symbol of all that hard work. As for higher education, there are many colleges and universities which will accept a student based on their standardized test scores. You may consider homeschooling on the college level. Peterson's Independent Study Catalog gives information on college level correspondence courses. If you’re a Mom or Dad who would like to further your own education, consider speeding things along by getting credit for courses by taking placement tests or through a life experience portfolio. There are several books on this subject listed in John Bear's College Degrees by Mail . When you choose a college you can request information on how to put together a portfolio. Some even offer a class in the subject. You cannot just say that you learned something, you have to prove it. Note that some colleges have residency requirements.
The GED or proficiency tests can help with employers who are unfamiliar with homeschooling and require proof of graduation.
Socialization is not a big problem for most homeschoolers. There are support group outings, (which includes field trips and parties), Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, religious organizations, 4-H, community education, sports, neighborhood friends, music, gymnastics, dance, art classes, group P.E. classes and much more.
Homeschoolers get plenty of socialization. You may find that you get to a level where you have to start limiting your outside activities or try to arrange them all on the same day so you don't have to stop lessons to pack everyone in the car and go to another class or activity. You may want to join a co-op where a group of families get together and take turns teaching a class once a week or so in a subject they're comfortable with.
You can't find a support group? Start one! You can believe that there are other homeschoolers in your area. You just haven't met them yet. When we first began homeschooling there was no group here. Now we have about 30 families and are still growing. Membership changes with each year as families move away and others move in.
How do you begin a group? Well, mostly you just find other homeschoolers in your area. Also, you can ask your state support group for help.
If you need help getting started, contact your state support group. Of course, you have to find your state group (and also families in your area). Again, check the internet. If you don’t have a computer, chances are your public library does. Your state group probably has a web site. Check the Home School Legal Defense web site as they have links to some state groups. You might even ask at your local school supply store. Since a good number of folks homeschool for religious reasons, you might check your church family for leads.
In some cases there may be more than one support group within a locale. You might want to join the one whose members hold most closely to your philosophy of educating, or your religious affiliation. Whatever group you choose, be as active as you feel you can be without sacrificing the quality of your home or school life. Being in leadership is very rewarding but also time consuming. The same people should not be asked to assume leadership year after year as they will get burned out and the group will soon fold.
If your child is interested in sports there are community sports sponsored through various organizations. Contact your local recreation department for more information. Also, there are swim competitions through country clubs. There are many opportunities to participate in sports programs that are open to all children, regardless of whether they attend a public, private or home school. Check with other homeschoolers whose children participate in sports. Consider starting your own team. Put a notice in your newsletter. If you are knowledgeable about a particular sport, canvass area homeschoolers. See if anybody else is interested in helping you .
My kids love music! They are always singing (sometimes at the school table). As young children, they loved Steve Green's Hide 'em in Your Heart, the Wee Sing tapes and the Donut Man’s wonderful tapes from Integrity Music. Now my daughter likes Jaci Velasquez and my son Ray Boltz . You have to decide what your musical standards are for your family.
I believe children can learn to enjoy different styles of music and may be exposed to different kinds of music, including and especially classical. I have been told to listening to the baroque music enhances learning. Can't hurt. :-)
Museums can offer a chance to see a wide variety of art styles. There are also books of famous artwork, some even part of children's curriculum programs. You can teach your children about famous artists, have them take art classes, or buy art books from which to teach them yourself. Many of these are very good and don't require you to have a lot of skill in order to teach.
I have a child who has a wonderful color sense and (I think) great art skills so I have examined a lot of art books and programs. Mona Brookes' Drawing for Children had some good ideas. I've also used Cartooning for Young Children in Christian Perspective by Vic Lockman and The Big Yellow Drawing Book by the O'Neills. The Drawing Book by Leon Baxter is a sort of summary of a series of books by Mr. Baxter. One book we used a lot was a hand-me-down Golden Press book given to the children by their aunt called Let's Draw: Quick and Easy Steps to Cartooning with Frank Webb. It shows how to draw with letters. Another book on drawing with letters is Drawing with Number and Letters by Rebecca Emberley. The Mark Kistler books are also fun. The Beginning of Creativity by Lindamarie DiNardo is a "right brain approach to creative drawing skills based on creation." Finally, there's always art lessons with a "real" art teacher who can give immediate feedback. If you can get a number of families to participate, you might be able to hire a teacher for your group once a week.
Crafts are another favorite of the younger set. I like paper crafts—paper plates, construction paper, hand art. You wouldn't believe the things you can make from a cheap paper plate! I say cheap because the cheap plates work better than the more expensive ones. We've made Pilgrims, and cats, and frogs and any number of other interesting things. We also do hand art. Hand art is making animals and things (such as turkeys for Thanksgiving) out of an easily accessible item—your hand. It's amazing and fun and everyone has a hand so even the little ones can do it. We've also done foot art. That one tickles.
There are some wonderful craft books out there. Shining Star Publications publishes a whole series of Christian craft books. There are some American Girl craft books which have some fun activities. My daughter was in the American Girl club. I remember that one of the activities she did to earn an award was having a tea party. We used special tea cups and invited her friend. They made little sandwiches and had a wonderful afternoon. There were many more activities which were fun and educational too.
Thanks for letting me share this information with you. I hope it has been helpful.