Lonely Reload
Blogging Stop Smoking
today i woke up at 7.20am. it seems that i seems to success to do something frequently as i told myself. after preparing myself, i went to attend the Moral &amp; Etika tutorial. the tutor seems to be strict about the presentation and require more thing. besides, when one of the classmate talking about a case, it seems like reflecting to myself when i think about it. after the class, i just followed my classmate to see whether where to go. then we walked and have our breakfast below the tree and i find it was quite delicious in my case. anyways, i just wish that soon i can join into their conversation although i know it can't be done instant but soon it will.
after that, we went to TARC Cyber Center because want to study about the LCM small test. however, i has been looking for it and it seems that i still not very clear about it. suddenly, i just found out "something" and it has totally changed my day. i just feel so "emotion" again after knowing about it. therefore i decided to make "some decision". honestly, i did know my emotion did affect me the most on every decision i made. during the time attending the Internet Database Applications tutorial, my soul was totally away and keeps think about the "matters" until i know a bit about the SQL thing. after the class, i walked back home and keep think about the "issue" again.
one of my housemate asked me to watch together the Kung Fu Panda 2 or Pirates of Caribbean because it was cheap for today and i promised with them last week. around 2.20pm i went to attend the Logistics &amp; Channel Management lecture. it seems that there is quite a lot of people attend today because there is small test. during the time the lecture distribute the question of 20 marks, i seems to be "blurr" and don't know what to answer. anyways, i just write down the case study details for the answer and feeling "gg" for it. suddenly i remember about the TARC program supervisor asked me to see her today and it was around 3.30pm to 4pm but the small exam until 4pm.
therefore after the class, i quickly walk to the SBS Office although it was raining heavily. during the time have a talk with her, it was about the "clinic workshop" and others thing. anyways, i seems to have a lot of detail and knowledge from her. after that, i went to library because the sky is still raining heavily. then i SMS one of my housemate that i will not go for the movie although they has booked because it still raining. after some moment, another housemate friend's call and said will fetch us go. during the time we went to Time Square, it seems that we almost stuck in car for 1 hour and 20 minute before reaching there due to traffic jam which cause by accident.
when i reach there, we are just in time for Kung Fu Panda 2: The Kaboom of Doom 3D to start. i just know we are watching 3D instead of the normal ticket. during the time watching the movie, i feel that the 3D spectacle was quite blur and hard to see. anyways, after watching the movie, i feel the movie was quite okay only. however, i did learn something from the movie which is "sometime we just need to release our hand for something happened because life still goes on". after the movie, we went to meet other housemate because they watch different movie. then we have our dinner at the KFC. around 10pm we make a move from there and went back to Genting Klang because some housemate want to have dinner at there.
during the time having dinner with them, it seems that my "face expression" has betrayed me. one of the friend said that "no matter what's happen, life still goes on" which has enlighten me. furthermore, he said that actually everyone has their own problem, why don't you just think in the happy way instead of the negative side? finally we arrived home at 11.20pm. then i start to think for some moment about the "decision" i make today and have some conclusion that i should face it instead of avoid it. anyways, i just feel that blogging actually can stop smoking although i did not smoke.
until now i still remember one of my secondary friend asked me to try because you will forgot something for that moment but i still did not try. sometime you must understand the reason behind why people smoke which because most of them i feel is releasing stress. honestly speaking, that's goes same way for me when i blog about. my stress tend to be released into words although it can last for some moment just like smoking. throughout my blogging journey, i seems to discover a lot about life although there is some up and down. besides, you need to be responsible to anything you wrote about. in conclusion, i feel that sometime we need to cool down and think carefully before making any decision. at last, blogging is for everyone which motivated by passion not guilt. =D
About Me
I am just a growing teenager who still exploring the world~ i think a tofu can describe my personality because i am very soft-hearted person. easily feel sad in real life. i just can express myself through blogging everyday in Malaysia. Feeling too long to read? Follow the guide below. Red : Most important Message i would like to share. Green : Meaningful words that i feel. Blue : Website Links. Others Colour : Highlight for fun. Sorry for my poor English. In fact, my English is not English but is Malaylish~ =D