The Potty Tots Potty Training Kit, which comes in girl and boy versions, includes a how-to chart, a rewards chart, a DVD and a story book, so you're prepared with plenty of options for your toddler's mood and learning style. The how-to chart has pictures and simple words to help toddlers remember the bathroom process. Overall, this is a nicely made potty training kit that should be helpful to most families.
Charts wipe clean easily and use clings instead of permanent stickers.
The chart, story book and DVD give toddler options for various learning styles.
Includes short lessons on not wasting toilet paper and washing hands.
The music on the DVD is fairly bland.
Football analogy on reward chart may be a little beyond toddlers' grasp.
Complete potty training kit with instructional chart, reward chart, cling stickers, story book and DVD.
Available in boy and girl versions with slight variations on the potty training process.
Potty Tots Kits cost about $20.
Step-by-step potty training charts are available separately for $5 at pottytots.com.
Guide Review - Potty Tots Potty Training Kit
The Potty Tots Potty Training Kit can be ordered in blue for boys or pink for girls. The kits are largely the same except the main characters are boys or girls depending on which you order, and the girl version doesn't mention standing up to use the bathroom.
The story book starts off with an older sibling explaining to a younger sibling how he or she learned to use the potty at preschool. I like that there's no big fuss made about it being difficult or a long process, since often in potty training books or DVDs you have a really hesitant or scared toddler who must be convinced to use the potty. If your toddler doesn't have any apprehension about starting potty training, there's no reason to give him or her the idea that it's a scary process, and the Potty Tots story book and DVD avoids doing so.
The DVD has a cute animated version of the story from the book. It also has two music tracks, one with words and one with just music. The music is the weakest part of the kit, and isn't terribly motivational since the song with words drags a bit. The song from the story book isn't included as a separate music track on the DVD.
I like the included charts, which are easy to wipe clean if necessary. A set of 14 cling stickers are included, giving you plenty to put on the charts plus some for your toddler to place at whim. The clings mean you can reuse the charts or go through the steps and rewards multiple times.
The step-by-step potty sequence chart can be placed near a toddler's potty and is a simple words and pictures reminder of what to do in the bathroom (including not wasting toilet paper and washing one's hands). I like the reward chart with its small and large goals, but some toddlers may not understand the goal chart since it's broken down into football downs and touchdowns.