Frequently Asked Questions
General Questions
Do I have to be Episcopalian to enroll my child? No! Although Trinity Wall Street is an Episcopal parish, it views its preschool as community outreach. We embrace the diversity of our students, teachers, and administrators.
What are the hours of operation and school holidays? The school operates between 8am and 6pm. It is a year round program, closing only for major holidays, with the exception of the last week of August. The school closes for CPR training, staff development, and to address any changes to the physical space that are difficult to address throughout the school year.
Can I visit my child during the day? Absolutely. We have an open-door policy, and parents often stop by for a visit.
What qualifications do your teachers have? Trinity Preschool and Nursery staff members are skilled educators who meet all requirements set by our licensing agent and the National Association of the Education of Young Children.
Which meals are provided? Parents are responsible for bringing in the children's meals. We provide milk, water, juice and a take-home snack of crackers.
Can parents administer medication during the school day? Yes, parents may come to the school to administer the medication themselves.
Is there an outdoor playground onsite? No, but we take the children to parks in Battery Park City and we make use of the play spaces which we have indoors. There are four large play spaces, or Jumping Rooms, in Trinity Preschool and Nursery.
How do you reach the park? Infants and toddlers are taken in red buggies which can seat 2-4 children. The Preschoolers walk to the park holding a partner's hand.
Are there extra activities provided, such as Spanish, computers, and gym? We do not provide these sorts of enrichment classes for the children.
Can my child use bottles or favorite dolls to nap? Children may bring a favorite soft toy to cuddle during naptime. Bottles will be given to the children before they are placed in their cribs.
Is artwork a large part of the curriculum? The children are encouraged to express their creativity and individuality through art activities. We avoid doing art work which is produced largely by the teachers, and we encourage the children to use a variety of mediums to express themselves.
What happens if my child gets sick at school? If your child becomes ill during the day, we call to ask you to pick up your child.
Can I bring my child to school if he/she is not well? We ask parents to keep children who are not feeling well at home until they feel better. A child who needs to be held all day cannot receive the same attention in a preschool setting as he or she would at home. Sending a sick child to school will only add to your child's discomfort and possibly make the absence longer.
How often do you wash the children's hands? We wash hands after each meal, after an art activity, when we return from being outdoors, before and after we change diapers, before and after playing at the water/sand table, and otherwise as needed.
How often do you disinfect toys? Any toy which is mouthed is disinfected immediately. The remainder of the toys are disinfected according to the children's use * at least daily for infants and toddlers, and as needed for preschoolers.
How often are the changing tables, microwaves, countertops and feeding tables disinfected? What do you use as a disinfectant? We disinfect the changing table after each diaper change. The microwave, countertop and meal tables are disinfected on a daily basis as needed. A bleach and water solution is used.
Who supplies diapers? We ask families to provide diapers.
How do you celebrate birthdays? Usually with a special lunch or snack.
How do I get more information about the preschool? Please call (212) 602-0829
Toddlers Questions
When is naptime? For the Toddlers, rest time is between 1-3. Children are encouraged to bring a soft toy from home to cuddle while sleeping on their cot.
What can I do for my child's language development? We encourage parents to read books to their children, let them read books by themselves, and provide many opportunities for them to engage in social interaction with their peers.
When is my child going to be potty trained? Parents should begin the process of potty training at home. We will assist in the training but we will not initiate it. Children develop at their own pace, and some children will not be as interested as some of their friends in using the potty. Greater success will be achieved if the child is interested, is willing to learn, and is not being pressured.
Can toys from home can be brought into school? Yes, but we ask that the toys be placed in the child's cubby when they arrive at school. Soft toys may be taken from their cubbies for use during naptime only.
Do toddlers have a set schedule everyday? Yes, each classroom has their own schedule. Having a structured day is important for the toddlers to feel secure. They do not respond well to surprises and they are much happier when they understand the routine for each day.
How do you handle a temper tantrum? We try to help the child identify their emotions and verbalize them. We then try to redirect the behavior to a more positive one.
What does the toddler curriculum entail? Our toddler curriculum is developed with activities incorporating the five areas of development: language, art, sensory, gross-motor &amp; fine motor.
Preschoolers Questions
Do you use time out? Rarely, as it should only be used in extreme situations. We prefer to redirect the children when necessary and help them problem-solve and make decisions when they have a conflict with another child.
When is naptime? For the preschoolers, rest time is between 1pm - 3pm. Children are encouraged to bring a soft toy from home to cuddle while sleeping on their cot.
What's the lunchtime routine? When the children return from their morning walk, they wash their hands in preparation for lunch. The children help set the tables and lunch is served between 12pm and 12:30pm.