Your Comments on our Games
As a software author, I get lots of letters and emails. For my games, I usually get letters from teachers, parents and children. Here are some of the more memorable comments I've received. All are treasured. All comments are shown exactly as received.
Comments on our Brickles games...
"Both my wife and I play Brickles more than any of the other games we've acquired. This says a lot. To be honest, a lot of the games out there are rubbish!! Yours is one of the better ones."
"I like your shareware and I would send you bucks but my mom says it isn't a good investment so in thanks I am going to tell you about me..."
"Dear Brickles, Hi, my name is B.N., and I'm ten years old. I would like to tell you that your computer game is great esspicially when you get your name on that hall of fame score board. Did you know that this computer game was so great that I copy this game to every single one of my friend that have a macintosh. I even like this game because when me and my sister play this game we can challenge who has a higher score. I'm sorry that I don't have dollars to give you but if I did I would give it to you. Bye I have to stop now."
"I never thought that I'd ever actually be sending anyone money for shareware but here I am. I guess I'm just too honest, or maybe just strange. Your game (Brickles) is my 5 minute pastime when something's printing. But, I have to admit, I play it just about every day."
"It has given me many moments of pleasure and laughs. I feel like a kid in an arcade."
"It's fun, it's soothing but I rarely get very far unless I lockup my 3-yr-old Burmese (cat). You might market this as an interactive cat toy! Something about the way it bounces and the sound breaking Brickles make makes her crazy."
"I use your program Brickles a lot in my occupational therapy programs. The students love it and it really helps improve their eye hand coordination and visual tracking skills."
"I love Brickles Plus! I'm not very good yet, but I will!"
"Thank you for building up Brickles. I enjoy playing it. Do you like to play your own games? Do you build computers? You must be pretty smart! Do you have any new software that you've been working on? What kind of computer do you have? I just got a new computer. You're proboblay a busy guy, so I won't take up all your time."
"We (my family) all like this game so much. My father says it is good to play when the brain is tired after studying or working. (But he is the worst player of my family - he seldom takes more than 100 scores.) I always play with one huge paddle and slow ball. Maybe I'm going to play the more harder one in the far future. That's very difficult, isn't it?!"
"Brickles was an okay game but do you have any other games. If you send me more games and they are good I will pay money..."
"I think your game is really neat! My highest score so far is 232."
"...I looked at all the other shareware games that came on our system and promptly trashed them - all except your delightful Brickles Plus. With that, you have accomplished what no other designer/writer of game software, amateur or professional, has ever been able to do - that being not only to get me to play and enjoy the game, but to demonstrate my enjoyment by paying for it....Being an old f--- I can play it at a slow pace and enjoy it, and when our children come to visit they can set it to higher speeds and enjoy it as well...Even my wife - who resisted anything to do with computers for the past ten years - has gotten interested and now plays Brickles; though if she will ever go on to Microsoft Word or Adobe Photoshop, only time will tell. Brickles did break the ice!"
"I think I play brickles the most out of all of my games in the world."
"I haven't stopped smiling since another secretary here in the office shared me your Brickles game."
"All of us would like to thank you for the design of the game. It's fair dinkum and well done. Good on you."
"Brickles is a very neat game. It is the one and only game on my Apple Menu."
"Brickles was the first Mac game my daughter got interested in ... ooops, no, it's the first Mac game *I* got *addicted* to."
"We're all hooked on Brickles. Thanks for a great pastime."
"My grandkids love the game."
"Have tracked your progress over the years -- WOW! The latest versions are wonderful!"
"...a semipsychedelic makeover of the perennial favorite..."
"Thanks Ken, your games are awesome. Our friends are addicted."
"My grandchildren and I are having a ball with these games."
"Only complaint is this game is sooo addictive."
"I've downloaded bunches of brick bashing games and yours is by far the best."
"I hold my Schools record of 2130 (I had to stop as lunch ended)."
"My son's favorite game!"
"You are the MAN, this game ruled then as it does now. Hooray for brickles!!!"
"My nieces and nephews love playing it on my imac."
"My wife has just scored over 6000 points in the game! Looks like her love affair with Solitaire will be taking a back seat for a while."
"I like the 8X BONUS BRICKLE"
"Your Brickles Deluxe is by far the all time favorite at all ages levels at my school. We use if sparingly, though, or otherwise kids wouldn't get any work done at all!! It is the ultimate reward!!!! Thanks for developing these great things for us!!!!"
"...both your Hangman and Brickles software are among the most popular with my special ed. students."
"Your games are quite popular on the Mac in my waiting room."
"this game is the best"
"My dad uses your software/game to help him recover from a stroke. In addition to the game's helping him with his concentration and reaction time, I thought it would be fun for my kids to play."
"This week I'll be doing my intro for the year in all my classes and guess what??? When I'm done with my "ground rules speech" for each class we do Brickles Deluxe just for fun for the last 10 - 15 minutes I have them!!! It *is* the all school favorite, that's for sure!!!"
"brickles rox!"
" I LOVE LOVE LOVE BRICKLES!!!"
"i love this game its been my favorite for decades"
"I seriously love this game."
"By the way, I'm addicted to Brickles Deluxe so I'll probably have to send you a bill for the therapist I'll need to see to break the habit."
"Brickles rules"
"Wow, I love this new version! I am getting hooked on the smaller, square version of the game. Wife and I both like the new sounds, the toolbar you've added, too. This is THE game I use to relax with!"
"You've got another winner!"
"It's a great game. . .particularly fun for me to watch the Brickles competition between my 9 year old grandson, Benn and his grandfather (my husband) Gary"
"I would buy a macintosh just for this game :)"
" i live for this game!!!"
"I just thought you would like to know that since you reminded me of Brickles, and sent me the code for it, I have been playing it day and night!. I used to have something resembling a life, but no more. At my age (70), my reflexes are not so hot, but I keep trying."
"I am an enormous Brickles fan, and fell in love with it when I began playing it at school."
"im a 13 year old who is into all those high-tech games as some people would say but yet brickles tops them by far"
"The kids are brilliant at it, amassing tens of thousands of points per game. My first game, I went down amidst the flames of a mere 61 points. Oh, the shame, but what a challenge! Thanks for the funnest way to lose hours of one's life since Tetris!"
"My name is Kelsey. I LOVE your game. I am 10 years old. I play it eny time I can. Thank you so much for inventing this game."
"Brickles Man...I played it and it is my favorite game. I play it a lot...I will try to pay the money but I am still working off money for breaking moms vase. Good bye."
"I am 76 years old and it may seem silly for me to play such games, but I like it and it helps me stay alert and improves my coordination. You can use that in your advertising if you want to, but don't use my name."
"Actually we got the game for my daughter who has a learning disability and needs work on eye-hand coordination."
"Thanks again for your help, and especially for the creation of this marvelous, exciting, educational, and FUN game."
"I found that it helped students who had trouble reading with hand/eye coordination, which in turn impacts the gaining of reading skills. It also gave them such a feeling of self-esteem that it made their entire school experience a better one."
"This is the ONLY game I ever play. Really. Too busy to bother with others. Brickles is an old friend...one I am glad is still around in the Mac world!"
"I think your game is really great for kids with autism, because it has the colors, the sounds, and the call for eye/hand coordination in a random setting that puzzles them (they are very good at finding patterns). They generally do not care about competing for higher scores but will be motivated by the ball hitting so many keys all of a sudden making a 'symphony'. Congratulations for your game!"
"Brickles rules i played it when i was a young girl."
"I am so happy, the game is great."
"I love brickles....it has to be the greatest game on earth."
"Thanks Ken!! You are my new best friend. :)"
"wow thanks ken!!!!"
"Thanks once again for making this game possible on non-Mac computers. You are the greatest!!!"
"IT WORKS!!!!!!!!!"
"And you haven't played 'Brickles' 'til you've played it with two kittens sitting on your monitor trying to help you catch the ball! You could start marketing it as a cat toy."
"This is one of the better games for Mac."
"This game is great!"
"My fiancee's mother loves Brickles, by the way!"
"Thanks so much I LOVE this game."
"What a fantastic game!!!! Highly addictive! The simple ones are ALWAYS the best!"
"Thanks for quick service . Brickles is up and running 5 minutes after purchase."
"That's really cool Ken!!! Top notch support!"
"Thank you for your programs, they are worth more than the price."
"I love the game and my daughter also enjoys playing it when she is here."
"Cheers Ken - that rocks!!! Gonna have some play-time this weekend and try and get up there on the scoreboard!"
"easier for the younger kids 'cos they can slow it down etc."
"Thanks for such an addictive game!"
"Thank you and than you for all the improvements you keep making."
"Your game is additive. Grandkids liked it and now I am also hooked."
"really enjoy your games. keep up the great work."
"I want to be added to the list of people who cannot thank you enough for your time and help."
"Like in your dreams (-:)" [Note: This was said in response to my email alerting registered users that the latest Brickles Pro allows users to enter their age along with their high score for publication in the Brickles Pro Hall of Fame web page.]
"I'm nearly blind, but love games, and this is wonderful. I have CP, and working with hand-eye stuff is very good for me. Thank you for making it so I can have things SLOW and LARGE!"
"congratulations on making the best ball and paddle software"
"Thanks so much for offering software for Macs. I keep Mac-evangelizing to family and friends, and their come-back is always, "it's hard to find software." Now I have another site to point them toward. Thanks again!"
"I am spending sinful amounts of time with the new, and old varieties of Hangman, as well as Brickles!"
"I love it! The trial version got me through several nights of terrible pain in the darkness of a hospital after a hellacious, painful operation! It was only right to buy it as soon as I came home. Thank you. : )"
"This game is super!!"
"You make great games!"
"Thanks so much for taking the time to develop such a unique game."
"Had several of your games before this one and all are great!"
"My cat CQ (aka Crazy Quilt) joins in the game every morning. First, she looks under, over and behind the computer for the sound. Then, she starts pawing at the screen's bouncing ball, and sometimes tries to bite the edge of the computer."
"...have advanced osteoarthritis in most of my joints. After spinal surgery and a hip replacement, my wrist and finger joints are now involved. I enjoy Brickles so much because I can go at a slower pace. I can vicariously be Venus Williams, a pingpong champ, or billiards player at the same time! I particularly enjoy being able to have a variety of backgrounds and colors -- it helps with those of us who no longer have good vision."
"Nice and pleasant game"
"WOW! A game I can play!"
"You bring out the child in me - I really do love Brickles - the sounds are just darling."
"Thanks so much for Brickles Pro! I'm 68 years old, and I love it."
"I have been using the Mac version of Brickles in my computer lab for 12 years! "
"a very fun game. My 5 year-old son loves it!"
"Great game!"
"I use huge ball and paddle for comfort-works great on my imac"
"MY 11 YEAR OLD AND I LOVE YOUR GAMES"
"Got it. I will resume my quest for world championship status...."
"I've just tried out Brickles Pro and the gameplay is quite good, so Brickles Pro it is :)."
Comments on our Hangman games...
"I just downloaded Hangman Plus v4.0 and can't keep my students away from it."
"Thanks for the great game (Hangman Plus). I tutor children and use the customization feature to reinforce lessons."
"I can hardly wait until my granddaughter is old enough to play this game with me."
"It brings back memories of the days I played Hang Man on the chaulkboards of the public school. Our whole family enjoys your game and have competitions with one another over who can get the most words correct without getting hung, and we're learning something at the same time! We have a daughter with special needs, who really enjoys and benefits from this game. She loves word games, and your game motivates her to use the computer more."
"I highly enjoy your game (on computers) Hangman. I highly play it everyday."
"Hangman Plus is wonderful! My students love it and the customizing has really helped introduce new vocabulary in a non-threatening environment! Thank You!"
"We are using it with some of our students who need a little help with their English, and have found they enjoy learning when they think it is just a game."
"It's lots of fun and I am especially appreciative as the game works well with some of my students. I am a music therapist and I work primarily on a private basis with handicapped students. On their behalf, thank you."
"Procol Harum ruined my winning streak on the music category of your Hangman Plus, but I won't hold it against you...Truth told: I haven't been so glued to the monitor since way back when Zork was first out...Thanks for making Hangman Plus concise, clever, full of neat sound effects (-and especially for resisting the urge to have Vanna White spin the letters around when you guess them correctly!)...Hangman Plus is gritty, fun, and best of all - IT ROCKS!...P.S. Who ARE Procol Harum anyhow? Was I born before or after their finest hour?"
"I love your game! Especially the sounds! That laugh. Great! Is it yours?"
"Your Hangman Plus is the best! I made a hard drive full of education and entertainment games and sent it to a friend for his 7 yr old son. Hangman is his fave! He uses it for spelling homework."
"I'm a Mac user and I have one of your games called Hangman and I liked some of the graphics and now I have a suggestion for you. This suggestion might be hard. Anyways I know there are a lot of games for a computers and there are games for Nintendo, Sega and Super Initendo, So my suggestion is a new game for the Mac. I'm sure you've heard of Mortal Kombat a game children love for Sega and Super Nintendo and I know you've help make games and I've wondered if it would be possible for you to be able to make a game such as Mortal Kombat for a Mac. I am sure you think that it would be hard work and believe me it probably is. Well don't want to waste most of your time so I'll go. Write back if you have time. P.S. If you do make the game do you think I could have a copy."
"I love your game Hangman Plus. It scares the living daylights out of my nephew, but he is only one, and shouldn't be playing computer games yet anyway."
"...I am delighted with Brickles and Hangman and will be using it with one set of grandchildren this week-end and with another set later on...It is a relief to have games that challenge the reflexes and intellect without guns, slaughter, and explicit sex. From six to septuagenarian we are grateful to you."
"I am a junior high computer teacher. My students used some games on a trial basis this quarter...Your game, Hangman Plus, was in the top five."
"After playing Hang2000 only once, I was hooked! The graphics and sounds are superb. A perfect tool for educators..."
"I used your demo of Hang2000 in my middle school special ed class of kids with learning disabilities. You have a winner!"
"I'll pass the word - wonderful program!"
"Have tracked your progress over the years -- WOW! The latest versions are wonderful!"
"I just wanted to let you know how much I am enjoying your game Hang2000-I find it to be positively ADDICTING."
"This is one of the best kids educational games I have seen in a while. Kids of all ages enjoy the game...even adults. Congratulations on a fine piece of work."
"Thanks Ken, your games are awesome. Our friends are addicted."
"My grandchildren and I are having a ball with these games."
"Hangman was a hit. The students loved it and now are asking to play every day."
"hey im commentin on ur game Hang2000 IT KICKS MAJOR BUTT AN I LOVE IT!!!!!!!!!"
"Thank you for the info to unlock the features of Hangman 2000. I look forward to procrastinating all those little jobs around the house that will go ignored while I feast upon your little game!"
"Great game--thanks! I am having fun with it already, and my grandchildren will love it."
"We LOVE it!!!"
"...a great version of a classic game that most every child has played."
"I really enjoy Hang2000. I've found out how much I don't know! :-)"
"...both your Hangman and Brickles software are among the most popular with my special ed. students."
"Your games are quite popular on the Mac in my waiting room."
"Our family is having a blast with this game"
"Your game has provided many smiles and chuckles, along with increasing knowledge. You are appreciated."
"I am very impressed with your programs, and I know they will be a wonderful addition for my students here."
"I think it's great what you're doing for todays' children."
"It's a riot!"
"You get my top-dog award. No one offers such personalized help as you. You're quite a guy."
"Just wanted to let you know, that we are raising our 3 grandchildren, who along with us love your hangman version. Even our 5 1/2 yr. old waits her turn on the computer to play the Christmas words."
"This game is absolutely charming."
"My 4 year old child who can barely read loves guessing the letters"
"Very good game for my grand kids (and me)"
"My husband is a Stroke Survivor and it is amazing how this game has helped him in word retrieval as his speech was affected, and this is the first thing that he really enjoys doing."
"Everyone in our family, from the 4th-grader to the old man (me) plays Hangman 3000. It has brought us a great deal of enjoyment. You have a right to feel proud."
"The Hang3000 is brilliant and a godsend."
"We got through all 42 [Presidents] by the way, before my wife insisted I put my daughter to bed at about 10:30! (The daughter wanted to go on and try all 50 states in States3000!)"
"My middle school kids LOVE your programs. Am excited to get your new ones. I just started teaching U.S. History AND Language Arts in my learning disabilities middle school 8th grade class. THANK YOU!"
"Am sending off your web page to all the teachers I know to pass the word. Also adding annotations on how well your stuff works with my kids."
"I'm still excited to have my grandson start using the programs. Thanks again - count me as one of our happy customers!"
"'Hecka cool' is the quote from my 8th grader who tried President's Wives this morning."
"Good quality enrichment! Thanks again!"
"Great fun and a good learning tool."
"Thanks for all your help from me and my daughter she loves the game."
"I am a single mother of an 12 year old son. I downloaded your Hangman2000 a few days ago and I just wanted to write and say, Thank You. You can't start to imagine how your game has helped my son out in his studies and I want to take this time to commend you for the thought of sharing your software with others."
"We homeschool and think the games are great for learning and playing!"
"Your games have made my Grandchildren very happy, which makes me very happy."
"My grandsons and I were playing Hangman the other day and they really liked it. Brickles is still one of their favorites!"
"By the way, my kid can't get her hands off AmericanHangman, and she's learning a lot of things American from it. Thanks for writing such a great game."
"Love it. Great game for the kids and adults, too."
"I thoroughly enjoyed the use of these programs during my trial period and find them to be very educational as well as just plain FUN!"
"love your games - keep them coming!"
"I like it and the kids love it. All the new stuff is a hit."
"I'm glad that you retained the sexy voice in the Pro version!"
"I really enjoy Hangman as do my grandchildren. They can't get over how much Grandma knows. Of course, they fail to take into account all the years I've lived and absorbed information: both trivial and worthwhile."
"She loves Hangman Pro and plays at the assisted living facility where she lives."
"I love this game. Thanks for the program."
"The kid likes it!"
"This is quite a fun little game."
"I do love the Bible Hangman, and when I have "play time" find myself there."
"We finally got a new iMac and are very happy that we now have Hangman Pro v2. My wife especially likes playing it. She is disabled and not able to do much at all. This is her favorite game."
"It does work. Thank you so much. This is the reason it is a pleasure to work with you and your software. You always go the extra mile."
"I am spending sinful amounts of time with the new, and old varieties of Hangman, as well as Brickles!"
"Thanx, Ken, for your game. Consider us fans."
"Fun game!"
"You make great games!"
"American Hangman is great. What a wonderful learning tool!"
"Dearest Ken, My friend has inadvertently deleted your beloved Hangman from my computer!!! My husband is going crazy and needs it from you ASAP. Please send it to me. thanks for helping me out..... he loves it!!!!"
"I've been playing Hangman since 1992! I love it!"
"I want to thank you for your terrific games...the Hangman varieties. Do you have others as well? I find them helpful as a person with disabilities because of m.s.The games seem to help me think clearly, and the required dexterity of my hands to play is not too much, as in other games."
"MY 11 YEAR OLD AND I LOVE YOUR GAMES"
"I help run a Sunday school in Surrey in UK and we use your Hangman Bible game as a little light entertainment at the end of the session. The participants even ask for it so they certainly enjoy it."
"I don't remember where I found your products, but I like them and so does my mom. Thanks."
"Thanks Ken This game has already provided hours of fun for the family. i will checkout your other products."
"I had been looking for 3 hours on the Internet for a Hangman program that could help my son with his spelling words and definitions. By the time I found yours I was so tired of being on the computer but excited that I found what I was looking for. It works and he is on his way to passing his spelling. I wish I would have thought of this earlier in the school year. This is how I learned my spelling words when I was a kid."
"The kids enjoy your program and it really helps to reinforce the words we want them to know how to spell."
"Your Hangman Pro was acquired and installed on our Mac in the library room up at our local senior center. Some of our folks wanna play games they understand other than solitaire. Most do not care for 'FPS' or noisy games. And occasionally they want to sit their grandkids on their lap playing as equal supportive competitors. The sounds from Hangman lead others in the library to smile, laugh, and walk over to see what the sillyness is about. And a few sign up for our Mac class. Then they get in touch with their own grandkids in this newfangled way. So you are an important party helping to drag some of our seniors into the twenty first century."
"I have really enjoyed your hangman game I purchased last year as have our church youth and my nieces."
"Finally thanks to your kind help. I am now having a ball with the Hangman Pro game. Thanks so much for putting up with my requests for help. I really appreciated all you did."
"I have been playing with Hang Man Pro Love the game very well done...WOW that is Awsome very nice work I love how everything is so customizable we are using it for our church class I will be buying soon thank you."
"I love the Hangman Bible program and wish to get it for our non-profit youth center."
"My husband has some kind of early dementia and this was the first game I've found that he truly enjoys."
"I recently bought Hangman Pro and I'm hooked. It's simplistic and fun."