Overview of computer and video games
Computer and video games were first developed in the 1970s. As technology and programming improved, games became more accessible to individuals in their own homes and the industry experienced massive growth.
Many children enjoy playing computer and video games and while there are benefits to be experienced, there are risks also.
Computer and video games are programs that are designed for recreational use. They can be used on a variety of platforms, that is on many different types of machines, systems or devices. Games can be bought or downloaded from the internet. You can play games on:
a computer, either Mac or PC
home consoles used with TV sets. Commonly used systems are Sony Playstation ( PSOne and PS2 ), Nintendo Game Cube and Microsoft XBox.
coin-operated arcade game machines
handheld game systems. The most commonly used systems are the range of Nintendo Game Boys with other systems being released soon by Sony (PSP) and Nokia (N-Gage).
Palm Pilots (Personal Desktop Assistants — PDAs)
mobile phones.
Various types of games are:
first person shooter (3D Action, shooter, FPS). The player holds the gun and shoots other characters. Always violent. Examples are Quake , Unreal , Soldier of Fortune , Medal of Honour , Return to Castle Wolfenstein , Grand Theft Auto: Vice City, Vietcong, Battlefield 1942 .
combat . The player’s character competes physically, often through martial arts, with other characters. Always violent. Examples are Mortal Kombat, Tekken .
real-time strategy (RTS). The player can strategically direct battles. Always violent, but not usually graphic. Examples are: Age of Empires, Command &amp; Conquer, Close Combat .
role playing . The player goes on a quest of some sort overcoming obstacles on the way. Usually violent. Examples are: Diablo, Everquest, Morrowind, Ultima, Baldur’s Gate, Dungeons &amp; Dragons
adventure . The player follows clues or uses problem-solving to overcome obstacles and puzzles which must be solved to continue the story. Can be set in fantasy worlds or ancient times. Rarely violent. Examples are: Myst, Syberia, Dark Fall, Monkey Island.
simulators — sports, racing or aircraft flight. The player participates in simulated sporting situations, car races or flies an aircraft. Some are violent. Examples are: Links, Sports Car G2, V8 Super Cars, Flight Simulator .
platform . Relatively simple games, often made for young children. The player chases or avoids characters by jumping onto platforms. Examples are Super Mario Brothers, Sonic the Hedgehog, Donkey Kong .
Benefits of playing computer games
There are many benefits available to children and adults who use computer and video games in a healthy way. In addition to providing entertainment, some games can:
introduce children to computer technology
give practice in following directions, problem solving and logic, use of fine motor and spatial skills, visual skills
provide occasions for parents and children to play together.
Risks in playing computer and video games
There are many risks associated with computer and video games, which include:
becoming addicted
being exposed to violence, particularly practising violent acts in the first person
developing or reinforcing negative racial or sexual stereotypes.
Becoming addicted
Often children can become ‘hooked’ into the fast moving world of computer games. Excessive exposure to games can lead to a number of problems, such as poor eating habits, not mixing with others, poor communication, trouble with school work, social isolation and not paying attention in class.
A child who is cutting back on:
the time they spend outside
being with friends
playing sports
other social or club activities
in order to spend more time playing computer and video games may be at risk of developing an addiction.
Studies find a relationship between violent television watching and behaviour. Practising violent acts by playing computer games may contribute more to aggressive behaviour than passive television watching.
Game environments are often based on plots of violence, aggression and gender bias.
Playing violent video games may be related to aggressive behaviour (Anderson & Dill, 2000; Gentile, Lynch & Walsh, under review).
In many violent games, players must become more violent to win. In first person shooter games, the player may be more affected because he or she controls the game and experiences the action through the eyes of his or her character.
Some claim playing violent video games provides an outlet for aggression. This view is not supported by the research.
Development or reinforcement of negative stereotypes
Women are often portrayed as weaker characters that are helpless or sexually provocative.
Villains are often portrayed as coming from ethnic backgrounds other than Anglo Saxon.
What parents can do
It is helpful to be clear in your own mind about the potential impact of computer and video games. Dr Craig Anderson, one of the leading researchers on video game violence, has produced a simple three point summary, stating:
learning happens
content matters
venting (the theory that players get rid of angry feelings when they play computer games) doesn’t work.
It is important to be aware of what games your children are playing. Get involved in purchases they are making and use the classification to guide their choices. Learn as much as possible about the games, perhaps even playing them with your children. Make clear rules about what games are and are not acceptable in your home and the amount of time children are allowed to play them.