Zillions of Games
Zillions Development Corp.
Ages 7 to adult
Our parents editor wrote that, " Zillions of Games is one of those delightful staples every parent should have on their home computer."  No faint praise, given the number of programs SuperKids' editors see! This CD offers over 300 interesting games and puzzles to play by yourself or with friends.   The assortment and appeal of board games presented is timeless and challenging for all ages.   Differing graphics and  ease of use mixed with varying music and sounds from game to game serve to limit burnout.   Hints and personalized skill and time control settings' create a user-friendly interface with a seemingly endless number of strategy style games to engage players.   Reversi (Othello), Blobs, 8 Puzzle, Towers of Hanoi, Neutron, Solitaire, Chess, Maze, ...The choices include most of the classics and many unusual variations (e,g, Fairy Chess, Ultima Chess) as well as countless other fascinating unknowns.   You can play against the computer or with a friend using the Zillions of Games web site.  The web site also allows you to download more free games, create your own game variant, or even design your own new game. Our testers did not venture through  the website looking glass, but for those imaginations intrigued by these options, it is an interesting idea to explore.
Educational Value
All of these games are strategy-based, requiring an understanding of rules and the application of logic. The players must choose their moves with thought. Each game comes equipped with strategy tips, history, and help to aid in skill improvement.   Zillions of Games reinforces and builds memory, logic, and planning skills.
Kid Appeal
According to another one of our reviewers, "... Zillions of Games was rather addictive."   The presentation venue is colorful and appealing. Players with a short attention span can keep switching games as frequently as desired.   Although Zillions of Games does not have the gimmicky superficial hooks and fluff many children-oriented software programs hypnotize kids with today, once cajoled into exploring its countless offerings, all our young testers were hooked.
Ease of Use / Install
On our test machine, the installation and navigation of Zillions of Games was completely painless. Reference to the written instructions was unnecessary.
Best for... / Bottom-Line
All ages and genders will have countless hours of fun with this winner.   Bound to be a staple of any family's computer pantry, appealing to both parents and kids. Zillions of Games might also make a good entertainment option on a classroom computer for rainy day free-time.  