Dyslexia Consultants Aberdeen take a holistic approach to dyslexia treatment, with services and support that focus on comprehension and improvement through cognitive therapy and specialised academic resources.
Through our dyslexia screening, dyslexia assessments, workplace dyslexia assessments, and the dyslexia resources in our dyslexia shop, we can help those affected with dyslexia difficulties .
We supply Recognised Psychometric and Educational Assessments, Nessy typing tutor, Nessy games, Reading rulers, coloured overlays, Irlens Pukka pads, and Assistive Software.
HOOKED ON PHONICS (US) A program for Dyslexic learners is "Hooked on Phonics", and you can see details at their website Hooked on Phonics (Comments/reviews welcome)
Go Phonics Teacher-developed to provide struggling and natural beginning readers with a strong foundation for decoding the English language. Skills are taught sequentially, one step at a time. With over 70 components, Go Phonics features 48 games that integrate with its workbooks and decodable storybooks.
Wordshark - 36 totally different computer games providing high motivation and interest. 'This software has had dramatic results. My student simply can't believe that he can be learning so quickly, and now arrives half-an-hour early, and has asked to stay an hour over his lesson time. This is the first time that he has ever been able to remember spellings - ever. I have had to force him to take breaks each half-hour because he was so adamant that he would complete each module more quickly then anyone else. His progress has been amazing. I did not at first believe this because I thought that as a dyslexic he would probably remember his spellings one week but then forget them after a break, but I have just re-tested him on the modules he covered before the half-term break (three weeks ago) and in a spelling test of sixty words, he got all of them correct without any chance to mug up beforehand', J. W., UK.
Phonics Tutor Phonics, reading, and spelling curriculum for the computer.
Switched-On SchoolHouse (USA) - Switched-On Schoolhouse teaches 3-12 grade students standard subjects in a fun and easy to use computer-based format. The CD-ROM format provides an interactive learning experience, making Switched-On Schoolhouse seem like an adventure. The clever animation and special effects spread a contagious energy that gets kids excited about learning. 'Highly recommended for home schooling parents especially, with very good CD-Roms' (N.F., Maryland, USA).
Spark Island - BBC CD-Roms program - 'an excellent tool to assist in some of phonological awareness difficulties as they teach phonic rules in a game-like multi-sensory way (young learners).' (D.D., Singapore)
Reading through colored filters - explains the use of colored lenses to help reduce the effects of Scotopic Sensitivity Syndrome (Irlen Syndrome) where children and adults see the words go fuzzy or move around on the page, or experience a glare from words printed on a white page.
www.dyslexic.com This company specializes in a very wide range of computer software support programs for dyslexic learners. Recommended.
TEXTHELP (Worldwide) This computer program sits alongside a normal word-processor, like 'Office', and helps the child or student to find spellings as they type. There is a small box on the screen which attempts to guess each word as the person starts to type it. For example, if you type in 'b', it will come up with a list of words you have used before beginning with 'b', like big, better, beginning, etc. If one of these is the word you need, you can select it, and the word will go straight into where you are typing.
As you type more letters, the guesses get better. At the end of each session you are asked to save your spellings so that the program can begin to learn your particular vocabulary and make better guesses based on the words you use most frequently.
It can also read out what you have written so far - a very popular feature with children - so that you can hear if you have missed out any words or put in a wrong word. There are two versions - TextHelp Read and Write and Type and Talk. You can see details at TextHelp . Highly recommended. (John Bradford) (More comments/reviews welcome)
Tregear Books . (UK) Photo-copiable series used in many schools, with particularly useful books on Mnemonics which help children learn to spell those words which cause regular trouble - any, many, friend, because, island, enough, and so on.
'Sensational Strategies for Teaching Beginning Readers' . The Institute for Multi-Sensory Education (IMSE) has developed a program to empower parents to give their children a head start on the basics of reading, to support beginning readers, and to assist children who are struggling with the reading process. The Orton-Gillingham method is language-based and success-oriented. The student is directly taught reading, handwriting and written expression as one logical body of knowledge. Learners move step by step from simple to more complex material in a sequential, logical manner that enables students to master important literacy skills.
Franklin Spell checkers No dyslexic child should be without a spell-checker, particularly when they have homework to do.
Barrington Stoke publishers specialize in story books for young people who are late starting to read or may suffer from Irlen Syndrome. The pages are off-white to stop the glare, and the print is double-spaced. The story books are aimed at 'reluctant readers' aged 8 to 13 with a reading age of above 8 years. They publish a series of books, the most well-known of which is "Screw Loose" by Alison Prince, published by Barrington Stoke (ISBN 1902260015).You can see an article about their website in Dyslexia Online Magazine
ADHD: a path to success - an alternative approach to treating Attention Deficit without the use of drugs, by Lawrence Weathers, Ph.D.
ALPHASMART The AlphaSmart 3000 allows you to enter and edit text, then send it to any computer for formatting or directly to a printer. Its portability allows students to use it anywhere and anytime - in the classroom, at home, or on field trips. Its low cost allows you to provide technology access to an entire classroom of 30 students for the price of three to four computers. The AlphaSmart 3000 is a smart way to extend your technology dollars, to increase technology access, and to alleviate the equity issues at school. AlphaSmart
DyslexicHelp - set up to assist parents identify sources of information to help them understand more about Dyslexia and how to help their children cope with it. (UK)
Advanced Learning Science (UK) - claim to alleviate the symptoms of dyslexia through visual exercises based on your heart rate. New technology based on some success with adults, needing further research with dyslexic children.
Word Construction Kit (NZ) - A phonics word-builder where students hear, see, construct, create and work with 7000 phonic parts to construct the Seven Buildings of the Word World: consonants, vowels, endings, homophones, compounds, and Latin roots and prefixes. Natural speech, animation and graphics help reinforce in-depth phonics awareness in word-building and spelling. There are special areas for learning word order, punctuation, and the use of verbal, plural, and possessive endings. There is a variety of levels of word work: from simple single-syllable consonantal formation to complex polysyllabic Greek and Latin word-building - all levels involving word play and word experimentation. Students may test themselves by using a given word in a sentence. Student progress is recorded, assessed and stored for retrieval.
Hi2u 4 people with hidden impairments - Award winning site. Centred around ADHD, Aspergers Syndrome, Dyslexia and similar neurological differences, along with any other type of hidden impairment.
SCHOOL TIME SOFTWARE (US) The School Time Phonics Program is a comprehensive, four-disk, CD-ROM curriculum that provides an interactive, multi-sensory learning environment for mastering the basic letter-sound associations in the English language. To use the program students only need to know the letters of the alphabet. They do not have to know how to read beyond a first or second grade level, nor do they need to know much about computers. Once students sign in, they operate the program and complete their lessons unassisted. Words used in the program are pronounced, defined, and used in context. Sentences, couplets, and brief poems when they occur are read and repeated to students. In addition, information and concepts that are easier to grasp are taught first. Those that might be more difficult or less familiar are taught later. This "building blocks" approach to learning is followed within a lesson and throughout the curriculum. School Time Software . (Comments/reviews welcome)
ORTON-GILLINGHAM (US) The Institute for Multi-Sensory Education (IMSE) has developed a program to empower parents to give their children a head start on the basics of reading, to support beginning readers, and to assist children who are struggling with the reading process. The Orton-Gillingham method is language-based and success-oriented. The student is directly taught reading, handwriting and written expression as one logical body of knowledge. Learners move step by step from simple to more complex material in a sequential, logical manner that enables students to master important literacy skills. 'Sensational Strategies for Teaching Beginning Readers' . (Comments/reviews welcome)
LINDAMOOD-BELL 'SEEING STARS' (US) integrated reading and spelling program. The program helps stabilize phonemic awareness and assists in the development of sight words and spelling. Specific steps of imaging letters for phonemes through multisyllable words helps establish reading and spelling in context. Seeing Stars . (Comments/reviews welcome)
SRA OPEN COURT PHONICS REVIEW KIT (US) Widely used graded reading scheme for K-6, with the emphasis on interest and motivation rather than phonics. Open Court's new reading, writing, and learning program, provides young readers with a solid foundation in phonics. Children develop print and phonemic awareness and learn about how the alphabet works. They are explicitly taught about sound/letter associations and how to blend sounds and letters to read words. Children also have regular opportunities to use this knowledge in reading connected text and in spelling. Open Court Phonics . (Comments/reviews welcome)
GO PHONICS (US) Teacher-developed to provide struggling and natural beginning readers with a strong foundation for decoding the English language. Skills are taught sequentially, one step at a time. With over 70 components, Go Phonics features 48 games that integrate with its workbooks and decodable storybooks. Go Phonics (Comments/reviews welcome)
CATCH UP (UK) A phonics kit programme with CD-Roms designed to help the one in five of 6-11 year olds who struggle with their reading. The Programme has been developed out of detailed academic research and extensive practical experience and can be delivered by teachers or teaching assistants. It is based on one or two individual 10 minute sessions a week (15 minutes for 10-11 year olds). There is also an optional 20 minute group session. 'Recommended' L.L., UK. (Comments/reviews welcome)
READING RECOVERY (US) Reading Recovery is an early intervention program designed by Marie M. Clay (1979, 1985) to assist children in first grade who are having difficulty learning to read and write. Reading Recovery (Comments/reviews welcome)
THE PATTERNS OF ENGLISH SPELLING (US) by Don McCabe, published by the AVKO Dyslexia Research Foundation. This reference tool lists words by patterns together. You can download sample pages from this book at www.spelling.org (Comments/reviews welcome)
GOLDEN KEY SPELLING RULES (UK) 35 basic spelling rules explained in simple terms. Contains photo-copiable worksheets for the exercises, word games and puzzles. Available through Better Books . (Comments/reviews welcome)
CROSSBOW EDUCATION (UK)
A range of games and photocopiable materials designed by experienced special needs teachers for helping overcome literacy and numeracy difficulties. Established in 1993; widely recommended in the UK by specialist teachers and other professionals.
Crossbow Education . - 'An amazing range of phonic games, puzzles, matching cards, etc. - invaluable to anyone helping dyslexic children.' John Bradford, Direct Learning.
PHOTOCOPIABLE WORKSHEETS (UK) By Hilda King Educational. Using the concept of fruit trees, in which the pupil fills in missing letters/words, these worksheets help teach a variety of vowel and consonant combinations. Available from Hilda King . (Comments/reviews welcome)
KICKSTART PUBLICATIONS (UK) Designed for pupils having Specific Learning Difficulties. This book covers b-d confusion, consonant digraphs ch, ph, sh, th, wh, and the magic e rule with vowels a,i,o,u. Available from KickStart Publications . (Comments/reviews welcome)
BARRINGTON STOKE BOOKS (UK) Barrington Stoke specialize in story books for young people who are late starting to read or may suffer from Irlen Syndrome. The pages are off-white to stop the glare, and the print is double-spaced. The story books are aimed at 'reluctant readers' aged 8 to 13 with a reading age of above 8 years. They publish a series of books, the most well-known of which is " Screw Loose " by Alison Prince, published by Barrington Stoke (ISBN 1902260015).You can see an article about their website in Dyslexia Online Magazine (Other comments/reviews welcome)
TREGEAR PUBLICATIONS (UK) Photo-copiable series used in many schools, with particularly useful books on Mnemonics which help children learn to spell those words which cause regular trouble - any, many, friend, because, island, enough, and so on. Full details on their web-site at www.tregearbooks.com . (Recommended. John Bradford.) (Other comments/reviews welcome)
CONFUSING LETTERS (UK) This series of books focuses on letters which pupils often find particularly confusing - b/d, p/q, etc. - and aims to help them to feel confident in recognising and writing the letters both in isolation and in text. Recommended series of four books - John Bradford. Available from Learning Materials for Special Needs . (Comments/reviews welcome)
SUPPORT FOR BASIC SPELLING (UK) Series of six photocopy masters supports the teaching of basic spelling skills and has been developed to take into account the requirements of the UK National Curriculum and the objectives of the UK National Literacy Strategy Framework. The books are incremental in difficulty and can be used to complement the work being undertaken from any spelling programme to provide additional learning opportunities. Assessment pages and record sheets are included in each book to provide convenient ways of recording pupils' progress. Each book costs 12.50. Recommended positive worksheets - John Bradford. Available from Learning Materials for Special Needs . (Comments/reviews welcome)
TOE BY TOE (UK) The name 'Toe by Toe' was chosen to signify that a student makes progress by the tiniest steps - one toe at a time. However, even though the steps taken are small, the student can clearly measure his or her progress right from the first page. You do not have to be trained in any field of Education to use Toe by Toe. 'A friend recommended "Toe by Toe" to me, and we are slowly working our way through it. It is a chore to him, but he is definitely starting to see the benefits because he is able to break down larger words into syllables now.' (N.A., Kent, UK) Toe by Toe
LDLearning (US) Source for a range of workbooks, flashcards, study guides, and other educational tools for students with learning disabilities and Attention Deficit Disorder. LDLearning.com (Comments/reviews welcome)
Mrs Alphabet (US) Online resource designed for teachers of children aged 3-7. This site was created by Anne Lynch, an author and creator of children's books, learning tools, and educational materials to assist kids in early learning and successful progress in alphabet recognition, phonics and beginning reading. This website contains a variety of lesson plans, links to other beneficial sites, a newsletter, and a section for kids structured around the alphabet. This site has another interesting feature called the classroom. In this section, there are multiple ideas about creating word walls, name activities, alphabet jobs, calendars, and it provides sample portfolios for teachers to view. Mrs Alphabet
Dyslexic Advantage A wide range of articles, resouces, phone apps, contacts, etc. to help with dyslexia. "We created this network for our 8-year old boy as well as for every person who is living with dyslexia. We want this to be a place where successes, personal triumphs, and challenges can be shared. We want a place where people can learn from each other and be encouraged." Recommended! DyslexicAdvantage.com