Kids Chess -Interactive chess lessons, quizzes, games and puzzles for kids. Play chess against the computer. FREE online chess books for kids - download and print. Everything YOUR school needs to run a chess club. A unique chess site for kids, teachers and parents. Kids enroll in the
virtual academy by simply entering their name (real or otherwise) and then viewing the slide show chess instructions, and playing the online games, which include two versions of chess as well as other strategy games such Battleship and Tetris. Teachers will find resources to help
them start a school chess club, and parents will find recommendations on chess software and books. A site with something for everyone!
PLay Site - Play against human opponents at this Java game site with chat. Playsite includes rooms for checkers, chess, backgammon, and more. You can play as a guest, but registered users (registration is free) get a rating that increases or decreases with play. After logging on, go to the Checkers room to find a match. Remember, the games includes chat, so appropriate
Thinks.com - Play checkers against the computer at this visually-appealing Java checkers game by Cafesoft. You can set the level of difficulty by deciding how many moves (from one to ten) the computer can think ahead. You can also choose who plays first. Other Java games at this site include Connect4 and Blocks (a version of Tetris).
homeschooled brothers (both Oregon state chess champions) created this award-winning ThinkQuest Jr. site in 1999. If you are a beginner, start with their How to Play section, and then proceed to Basic Strategies. If you are already playing chess, take a look at Advanced Tactics, Opening Book, and the twelve Chess Puzzles. If you are considering entering a tournament, and are wondering just what to expect, be sure to read Tournament Play for an explanation of chess etiquette and the difference between Quads and Swiss tournaments.
ChessKIDS Academy is my pick of the day for parents, educators and students interested in chess for beginners. Kids enroll in the virtual academy by simply entering their name (real or otherwise) and then viewing the slide show chess instructions, and playing the online games, which include two versions of chess as well as other strategy games such Battleship and Tetris. Teachers will find resources to help them start a school chess club, and parents will find recommendations on chess software and books. A site with something for everyone!
Play against human opponents at this Java game site with chat. Playsite includes rooms for checkers, chess, backgammon, and more. You can play as a guest, but registered users (registration is free) get a rating that increases or decreases with play. After logging on, go to the Checkers room to find a match. Remember, the games includes chat, so appropriate parent supervision is recommended.
Play checkers against the computer at this visually-appealing Java checkers game by Cafesoft. You can set the level of difficulty by deciding how many moves (from one to ten) the computer can think ahead. You can also choose who plays first. Other Java games at this site include Connect4 and Blocks (a version of Tetris).
Gazillionaire is a terrific find! It is a Windows-based science-fiction fantasy game to download and play. Each player runs a trading company in outer space, racing from planet to planet, buying and selling a variety of commodities (such as jelly beans and lava lamps.) Along the way you'll learn about overhead costs, profit margins, capitalization and other business concepts. This free version is yours to enjoy, but if you get hooked, you can buy the Deluxe CD-ROM version with even more features. Be sure to start with the excellent tutorial. The difficulty level can be adjusted for students from elementary age to college.
Lemonade Stand is an engaging and addictive web game that teaches basic business math (sales minus expenses equals profits). The object of the game is to make as much money as possible in twenty-five rounds. Before each round starts, you review the weather forecast. Then you decide how many cups of lemonade to make and how much to spend on advertising. At the end of each round, you receive a summary of how many cups sold and how much profit was made.
Online Monopoly is a marvelous implementation of a classic that has endured to captivate another generation of players. Before you join a game, take a moment to watch an existing game. Online Monopoly moves much faster than the board game because the computer moves your pieces and handles the bank. All you need to do is click on the dice to roll, and decide which properties to buy or trade. Since these realtime games allow chatting, parent supervision is recommended. Plus other board games such as Backgammon , Battleship , Boggle , Checkers , Chess , Chinese Checkers , Clue , Scrabble , Scrabble Blitz  and Sorry!
Astronaut Stamp Scrambler, Mars Scrambler, Planet Word Search, Saturn Scrambler, Space Concentration Puzzle, Space Crossword, Space Shuttle Landing Jigsaw, Space Shuttle Cargo Bay Jigsaw and Shuttle Takeoff Jigsaw
Acid Rain Crossword Puzzle, Daily Science Movie, Earth Day Pay Day, Earth Day Word Search, Rock and Mineral Word Search, Gemstone Scrambler, Glacier Word Search, Glacier Jigsaw, Glacier Crossword, Rocks and Minerals Crossword, Science 101 Crossword, Scientifically Speaking Crossword, Staying Healthy Mixed Up Words, Staying Healthy Word Search and Staying Healthy Cure-ious Word Ladder