Please note that TheHomeSchoolMom lists local resources, including but not limited to classes, events, legal information, and support resources, to help homeschoolers find local support and resources. Although we believe that the information provided is reliable, we cannot guarantee their accuracy or suitability for any purpose. We disclaim any responsibility for the content found on these websites and the quality of the products and services provided by the organizations that maintain the websites. You are responsible for verifying their suitability for your family.
Homeschooling is regulated at the state level and changes may be made to the relevant statutes at any time. Always consult the actual state code for the most up to date and accurate legal information with regard to homeschooling. The links provided below contain information that may or may not be current.
The "Show Me" Letter - Many an uninformed (or informed but overzealous) school administration official has asked local homeschoolers for more documentation than the state homeschool law requires. In The "Show Me" Letter , Shay Seaborne relates her experience with an overzealous official and how knowing the law and being polite but firm is often all it takes to educate local officials. A "must read" for new homeschoolers!
Illinois Homeschool Freedom Watch This list exists to network ALL homeschoolers interested in Illinois homeschool laws, homeschooling legal issues, court cases involving homeschoolers and homeschooling legislative issues in Illinois, regardless of any group affiliation. All homeschoolers are welcome to join, regardless of homeschooling educational philosophy or religious affiliation. Members are encouraged to share experiences, wisdom and questions about legally homeschooling in Illinois.
Disclaimer & Disclosure: Opinions expressed by contributing authors, commenters and reviewers are solely the responsibility of the author. TheHomeSchoolMom.com assumes no responsibility for the accuracy of the contributions, comments, and reviews. TheHomeSchoolMom.com contains outbound links to websites offering educational resources. THSM may be offered compensation for these links, either in the form of commissions or flat advertising fees. We follow the DMCA procedures for removing any content that infringes on a third party's intellectual property rights. Read more "