Homeschooling and Unschooling email lists, support groups, message boards, forums and newsletters for those practicing home education in the United States. National lists for all, including such organizations as the American Homeschool Association (AHA), The Alternative Educators' Network (AltEd), Home Education Magazine (HEM), The National Independent Home-Education Network (NIHN) and The National Home Education Network (NHEN). Also including such topics as transitioning from high school to college; custody issues, attorneys and legal experts; politics and legislation; homeschool magazine and newsletter editors, webmasters and leaders; and military families. Locate fellow homeschoolers. Make new friends. Share resource ideas and curriculum / textbook information.
Experience learning and education as it should be!
You are here:    Home -&gt; Homeschool -&gt; Elists, Support Groups, Message Boards, Forums &amp; Newsletters Directory Main Page -&gt; National
National Email Lists, Support Groups, Message Boards, Forums and Newsletters
AHA-Discussion (American Homeschool Association) - The American Homeschool Association's AHA-Discussion list is a broad-ranging network of homeschoolers working to support homeschooling, and to provide a point of contact for information, resources and encouragement.
If you're searching for information about homeschooling - whether you're a concerned parent, a media writer, an academic researcher, an education professional, or already a homeschooler, or if you'd just like to discuss issues relating to homeschooling (or other topics), introduce yourself and ask some questions. You'll receive quick, friendly answers from our listmembers.
The American Homeschool Association, founded in 1995, is a network of homeschoolers working to support homeschooling by providing an online point of contact for news and information, resources and encouragement.
AHA-HighSchool-College (Admissions, books, diplomas, etc.) - Ask questions about homeschooling through high school and college - or share your experiences and resources with others who may be seeking help.
If the colleges were better, if they really had it, you would need to get the police at the gates to keep order in the inrushing multitude. See in college how we thwart the natural love of learning by leaving the natural method of teaching what each wishes to learn, and insisting that you shall learn what you have no taste or capacity for. The college, which should be a place of delightful labor, is made odious and unhealthy, and the young men are tempted to frivolous amusements to rally their jaded spirits. I would have the studies elective. Scholarship is to be created not by compulsion, but by awakening a pure interest in knowledge. The wise instructor accomplishes this by opening to his pupils precisely the attractions the study has for himself. The marking is a system for schools, not for the college; for boys, not for men; and it is an ungracious work to put on a professor. --Ralph Waldo Emerson
AHA-LibraryList (Discussing libraries and homeschooling) - A networking list for homeschoolers, librarians, and anyone interested in libraries and homeschooling.
The American Homeschool Association is a network of homeschoolers working to support homeschooling: A point of contact for information, resources and encouragement.
The American Homeschool Association sponsors three active email discussion lists, including AHA-Discussion for general topics of interest to homeschoolers, AHA-Libraries for networking between homeschoolers and public library contacts, and AHA-PoliticalAction for discussion of issues that impact homeschooling freedoms.
The American Homeschool Association web site provides links to interviews with many homeschooling personalities, a collection of political action columns from Home Education Magazine by Larry and Susan Kaseman, the AHA's History of Homeschooling series by various authors, and a lengthy collection of helpful and informative articles, columns, essays, editorials, FAQs and other formats which showcase the best writing on a wide variety of topics of interest to homeschoolers.
The American Homeschool Association's resource pages direct homeschoolers to helpful books, magazines, newsletters, websites and more. Listings show how to contact other homeschoolers through support groups, organizations, or online networks. And finally, a unique page of favorite quotes and excerpts on homeschooling, children, learning, and families highlights the perspective of the American Homeschool Association.
If you're searching for information about homeschooling - whether you're a concerned parent, a media writer, an academic researcher, an education professional, or already a homeschooler - check out the excellent collection of information and resources offered at the American Homeschool Association web site: http://www.americanhomeschoolassociation.org/ .
AHA-PoliticalAction (Homeschoolers supporting homeschooling) - The American Homeschool Association is a network of homeschoolers working to support homeschooling: A point of contact for information, resources and encouragement.
The American Homeschool Association sponsors three active email discussion lists, including AHA-Discussion for general topics of interest to homeschoolers, AHA-Libraries for networking between homeschoolers and public library contacts, and AHA-PoliticalAction for discussion of issues that impact homeschooling freedoms.
The American Homeschool Association web site provides links to interviews with many homeschooling personalities, a collection of political action columns from Home Education Magazine by Larry and Susan Kaseman, the AHA's History of Homeschooling series by various authors, and a lengthy collection of helpful and informative articles, columns, essays, editorials, FAQs and other formats which showcase the best writing on a wide variety of topics of interest to homeschoolers.
The American Homeschool Association's resource pages direct homeschoolers to helpful books, magazines, newsletters, websites and more. Listings show how to contact other homeschoolers through support groups, organizations, or online networks. And finally, a unique page of favorite quotes and excerpts on homeschooling, children, learning, and families highlights the perspective of the American Homeschool Association.
If you're searching for information about homeschooling - whether you're a concerned parent, a media writer, an academic researcher, an education professional, or already a homeschooler - check out the excellent collection of information and resources offered at the American Homeschool Association web site: http://www.americanhomeschoolassociation.org/ .
AHA-PubliclyFunded (Homeschooling is not public schooling) - The AHA-PubliclyFunded list is sponsored by the American Homeschool Association (AHA) for the discussion of issues relating to publicly funded school programs, specifically those which are directed at and marketed to homeschooling families.
AHSA-USA (This Association is a network of attorneys and legal experts.) - This list is an opportunity for homeschoolers to contact homeschooling attorneys and experts about homeschooling legal and litigation issues. It is an informal network of attorneys and legal experts that are concerned with litigation pending and threatened against homeschoolers. Its primary purpose is to exchange legal information within the profession, and to educate and support attorneys and experts involved in homeschool litigation. A referral list of attorneys and legal experts may be maintained. Since specific factual situations can change the legal advise given, logging on to the AHSA-USA list does not create an attorney-client relationship with AHSA-USA, any member of AHSA-USA, or any attorney responding to questions on this list, and AHSA-USA recommends that an attorney be consulted for legal advise pertaining to specific situations.
AHSA-USA_Homeschooling_and_Custody (Association of Home School Attorneys-Custody Discussion Group) - This list is an opportunity for homeschoolers involved in custody issues to contact other homeschoolers for information about homeschooling attorneys and experts, as well as exchange ideas and information about handling custody disputes as a result of homeschooling. As a result of numerous inquiries, AHSA was formed by Linda J. Conrad, an attorney and then the Legal/Legislative Chair of the HomeSchool Association of California, and other attorney members of HSC. Because of the national interest in this network, it is open to attorneys and experts nationwide. AHSA is a network of attorneys and legal experts that concerned with litigation pending and threatened against homeschoolers. Its primary purpose is to exchange legal information within the profession, and to educate and support attorneys and experts involved in homeschool litigation. A referral list of attorneys and legal experts is maintained at www.ahsa-usa.org. Since specific factual situations can change the legal advise given, logging on to the AHSA-USA list or the AHSA-USA Homeschooling and Custody list does not create an attorney-client relationship with AHSA-USA, any member of AHSA-USA, or any attorney responding to questions on this list, and AHSA-USA recommends that an attorney be consulted for legal advise pertaining to specific situations.
AltEdDiscourse - The Alternative Educators' Network has created an unmoderated, open e.list for discussing Alternative Education ideas; ideas that go beyond the monolithic system of public education that we have today. The popular discussions and frequently asked questions are, for the most part, centered on homeschooling. But this list is not limited to JUST homeschooling. Private Schoolers, Charter Schoolers, and even public school teachers and administrators are welcome to join in the conversation.
It is becoming painfully obvious to hundreds of thousands of parents that a monolithic, government run and taxpayer funded (GRTF) system of education is NOT the only (and in most cases not the best) form of education. Learning can happen anywhere, any time and be guided by anyone. (The only national organization I know of that decries this idea is the NEA. Check out their resolution on homeschoolers to guage their contempt for parent-guided education!)
Parents who are beginning to think for themselves are concluding that cramming children of the same age into small rooms to be "taught" by unchosen teachers for up to 8 hours a day may NOT be the best way for many children to learn. The Alternative Educators' Network was founded to help parents explore the options -- the alternatives -- and point them in directions that will help them become more confident in their own abilities as a teacher -- part of what parenting is all about.
AltlearnMapNetwork - This list is for Natural Learners and unschoolers from anywhere in the world who believe in child-led, natural learning. It is a list for those who are certain of their choice, and also for those who are learning to let go of school-at-home, and let their children lead the way.
This Yahoo group is only one aspect of a bigger picture. http://www.alternative-learning.org/ website. The web site links Natural Learning people, and support groups together from all over the world, by map. It also provides News, articles, research and many other useful resources. While there, click "Latest Information", to see updates for all parts of the website.
To have your subscription to this group approved, you are requested to send a brief post to; AltlearnMapNetwork-owner@yahoogroups.com , including your name, where you live and a little about yourself and the learning environment you provide your children. Also please state why you would like to join this group. This will likely not fit in Yahoo's comment, so please just send an email post. Thank you, Moderator AMN
FamilyTimesOnline - Home Educator's Family Times is the homeschool magazine perfect for new or veteran homeschool families from unschoolers to traditional learners. Written by nationally recognized experts each issue covers:
HEM's (Home Education Magazine) Online Newsletter - Sign up to receive Home Education Magazine's Free Online Newsletter. Each month you will receive news, information, resources and reviews, quotes, excerpts, short articles and much more delivered right to your email box!
Home Ed Politics - Trojan-Horse merged with Home Ed Politics July 2000.
This list is to organize and work toward the ultimate goal of repealing all compulsory education laws in all 50 states, so parents can live without fear of the state, reclaim their children and preserve their legitimate right to and responsibility for their children.
Compulsory education pre-empts ALL parents, and enables states to:
separate children from their parents five days a week, Monday to Friday
define what every child should learn regardless of the values of the parents
institute the state's educational concept by force using truant officers, juvenile courts, jail time and child protective services to induce fear in parents.
True freedom for ALL parents, can only be achieved through total ABOLITION of ALL "compulsory education" statutes in all 50 states.
Homeschool-Editors - Homeschool Editors, an email list sponsored by NHEN, was created for editors and publishers of homeschooling newsletters, magazines, e-zines and journals. Whether your homeschooling publication is large or small, you're welcome to join us. Let's discuss our dilemmas and discoveries as we try to bring information to the homeschooling community. (Please post links to your homeschool newsletters or upload to the file section of this website instead of posting whole newsletters to the list.)
homeschoolzone (the world is our classroom) - www.homeschoolzone.com is a place for homeschoolers, parents and teachers to learn more about how to better teach your child whether you formally homeschool or just want to help out with their homework at the end of the day. Teachers are most welcome too! We have great new ideas, weekly crafts &amp; recipes, FREE excerpts and essays from prominent authors and more.
HSC-L (HomeSchooling and College List) - a national email list devoted to the transition of homeschooled students into colleges and universities. This list is intended for homeschool students and their parents, admissions officers, financial aid officers, and members of admissions associations. We hope that this list will broaden communication and understanding about the issues facing homeschool students in their transition to college.
This list is sponsored by the Center for Urban Education of the School of Education of Pace University (NY), and by the Executive Board of the New York State Association for College Admission Counseling, and its Human Relations Committee.
To subscribe, send an email to listserv@list.pace.edu and in the message area type Subscribe HSC-L (Your Name) .
HomeschoolSupport - This list is for those needing support, help, and advice about homeschooling, unschooling, eclectic schooling or other alternative educational programs including homeschooling special needs and gifted students. The Homeschool Support Network is a non-profit service organization helping the homeschool community since 1986. Visit our website for free information, free magazine and more.
hs2coll ( Homeschooling toward college ) - A group for parents of teenaged homeschoolers who are aiming toward college. We discuss preparing to apply for college; what colleges might want; what courses, materials and curricula work for us and our kids; filling out college applications; how our older kids who are already in college are faring; particular colleges; SATs, SAT IIs, ACTs and AP tests; and other topics related to homeschooling teenagers.
As this is a non-partisan group, we avoid hot-button political issues. Many of these issues are relevant to homeschooling, but we don't want flamewars here. This is not a list for chatting, so members are requested to remain on topic.
HSingHighSchool - Everything the home school needs to know, wants to know, and wishes they knew about homeschooling the high school student!
If you've got questions, you've come to the right place to ask and help to answer others questions that have been asked.
Although CHASE SC, http://www.chasesc.com is a South Carolina association our free online resources help many homeschoolers around the globe. Therefore, this email group is open to homeschoolers everywhere!
There are many associations in South Carolina that strive to aid all homeschoolers; we thank those that belong to The Society for the many volunteer hours they provide to South Carolina homeschoolers, and to all the homeschoolers worldwide.
hswm (Homeschooling Webmasters) - The Homeschooling Webmasters list is for anyone currently maintaining a website that is primarily centered around information for the homeschooling community. Those working on a new homeschooling website are also welcome. The discussion is primarily technical.
Typical subjects might include notifications of URL changes, tips and hints for building and maintaining a homeschooling website, how to market your website, affiliate relationships, building communities through newsletters and mail list, and more.
LeaderSupport - This is a support list for all HOMESCHOOL GROUP LEADERS, regardless of religious beliefs or homeschooling philosophies. If you would like to give or receive input, ideas, and support from other Homeschool Leaders, then this is the list for you!
NIHN - National Independent Home-Education Network is where Independent Home-Educators will discuss political and social issues that affect independent home-educators throughout the nation. All states have different legalities but we can work together and brainstorm ways to affect change on the national level. Some discussion will consist preventing legislatures from making stricter laws for home-educators and assessing the damage or possible damage done to home-education laws across the nation.
Freedom of speech rules on this list, and you. this is a list for independent home-educators. It's for parents who have taken responsibility for their children's education regardless of learning/teaching methods or style.
Nothing is off topic here if it relates to independent home-education. This is a place for folks to connect with others of like mind. This list does not recognize charter schoolers or other alternative public schoolers as home-educators and you will not be treated as one.
Parent-DirectedEducation (Parent-Directed Education) - "The most important thing is to be an advocate for your child. Parents have a lot of power if they know how to use it." (Contra Costa Times, 5/5/03.)
"K-12 education has morphed as a field. So many of the old 'movements' have shattered and regrouped into smaller niches. . . old political alliances have broken down into a range of perspectives. A 'liberal' today might be for charter schools or against them, for test-based accountability or not. And 'conservatives' might favor a federal role in raising standards or oppose it. In short, the national dialogue has fragmented..."
Parent-Directed Education is our collaboration as THINKING PARENTS! Browse our quirky thinking resources here and visit "Cocking a Snook!" our new blog. PDE emphasizes networking and connections -- between ideas, events and trends; schooling and unschooling, public and private, traditional and alternative, tutors, mentors, libraries, camps, you name it! Parent-directed education centers on informed individual choices by empowered and thinking parents.
"Although many families still send their children to neighborhood schools, educators say increasing numbers of parents are weighing alternatives. Parents now have more choices than ever before."
"Ironically, just when some reporters are losing touch with their true subjects - children - many parents are becoming more curious about what exactly is happening in the classroom. . .such stories don t lend themselves to simple answers, and so are too often missed . . ." (Columbia Journalism Review, "How Are The Kids?" 2005)
RoseRock (Rose Rock Global Homeschool Network) - Rose Rock Global Homeschool Network is a network of INCLUSIVE support groups open to all homeschoolers regardless of race, nationality or religion. This e-mail loop is open to all homeschoolers around the world. And we do HAVE members from around the world!! Rose Rock also has active groups in different areas who meet for park days and field trips! Join us! At least get in on our e-mail fun and visit our website. :-D Current list of inclusive support groups includes Alabama, Alaska, California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maine, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, Japan and we are still adding more!!
USHomeschoolsUnite (US Homeschools Unite) - Homeschoolers standing united to support and protect each others homeschooling rights across the United States.
We will call, write, fax, and email our support to all legislators to stand for the continued right to homeschool; to protect our current rights as homeschoolers; and to gain further freedom only when it will not come at a cost. This group is inclusive and tolerant of all homeschoolers in the homeschooling community, we will fight for ALL homeschoolers right to homeschool.