Our blog is moderated occasionally and posteriorly. Moderators are volunteers. Internet users posting comments on this blog should not be considered as health professionals.
Comments posted on this Blog should be designed to support, not replace, the relationship that exists between a patient/site visitor and his/her existing physician.
We remind you that everyone can read and use your comments. You do not have the possibility to erase your own comments.
Internets users commenting on my blog must behave with respect and honesty at all times.
Internet users may not post any commercial/advertising comment.
Internet users commenting on my blog must post information which are true and correct to their knowledge. We invite you to provide resources (references, links, ...) on health/medical claims when possible and relevant.
Moderators Reserve the right to erase, without notification, any comment they would judge inappropriate.
People will go to great lengths to do stupid things. Teens especially are known for casting all common sense aside to follow the mind-numbing crowd. But how do we make our teens different? How do we help our children see the complete foolishness of their peers' actions, so they do not continue this childish behavior?
Getting Drunk Faster is Not Cool
Teens sometimes operate with a few beliefs or myths in mind that guide them in the wrong direction, and it is our job as parents to steer them the right way.
First of all, teens think it is fun or cool to be drunk . Not so. Sure, people may seem to be having a good time, laughing, being carefree, or interacting with friends when they've had more than a few drinks. But drinking too much also causes hangovers, nausea, poor judgment, and even alcohol poisoning and death.
Secondly, teens think that the faster they can get drunk, the better. Also not true. A faster intake of alcohol causes more side effects and more serious consequences.
Thirdly, infusing alcohol into the body in unconventional ways is safer, more fun, and undetectable. False again. However alcohol gets into the body; drinking, eyeballing, or "butt chugging", raises blood alcohol levels, which can be detected even on breathalyzers, and can cause as much or more damage to the body and brain.
Infusing the Body with Alcohol is Not Cool
Kids often find weird ways to get drunk because they think it is fun or can't be detected as easily, and videos and instructions quickly travel around the Internet of kids performing these acts. Pouring vodka into the eye or soaking feminine products in alcohol may seem unfathomable to adults, but kids who see other kids experiment with it may try it themselves. Not only are these practices dangerous because of the effects of alcohol on these body parts, but the goal of infusing the body with alcohol just to get drunk is dangerous and never a good idea.
Parents, it's time to talk to your kids. Use your best judgment - of course, it may not always be appropriate to give them all the details about ways kids are finding to get drunk. But you can talk to them early and often about the dangers of alcohol, drugs, and any other game or activity that causes bodily harm. Sometimes kids do these things because they don't think they are dangerous or really that serious. If kids are told not to drink alcohol, they might listen and obey, but they might excuse these other ways of getting alcohol into their system because no one has warned them about these things yet. Talk to your kids. Warn them. Don't let them continue this trend of foolish bodily harm because they think it's fun.
We often have biases about drug abuse. Maybe we think all drug addicts live on the streets of big cities, or that every rich and famous person does drugs or abuses alcohol, or that all young people will try drugs at least once in their life. Some people are hopelessly optimistic that we can change the world and beat drugs and alcoholism, while others just feel hopeless that anyone with an addiction can be saved.
Drugs and Celebrities
Another famous person has died, and again the cause could possibly be drugs. When this happens over and over, we tend to become disheartened and wonder when the drug abuse will end. That was certainly the attitude of another celebrity this week after the announcement of Whitney Houston's death. Celine Dion, in an interview with "Good Morning America" lamented the news about Houston's death.
Many are criticizing Dion for jumping to the conclusion that drugs were the cause of death before toxicology results are in, but what is also unsettling is the sadness Celine seems to be feeling. She talked openly about the drug abuse she says claimed Houston's life. "It took over her dreams, it took over love and motherhood," she said. "When you think about Elvis Presley and Marilyn Monroe and Michael Jackson and Amy Winehouse....To get into drugs like that for whatever reason, because of the stress and bad influence, what happens?...You have responsibilities as a mother, and then something happens and it destroys everything." (1)
Fear of Getting Hooked
Even more than the sadness is the fear Dion has of drug abuse. "There's something that happens that I don't understand, and that's why I'm so scared," she said. "I'm scared of show business, I'm scared of drugs, I'm scared of hanging out, and that's why I don't do parties and hanging out, and that's why I'm not part of show business. We have to be afraid." (1)
Turning Fear into Action
We do have to be afraid, but we don't have to let that fear rule our lives. Fear is a great motivator and it can help us prevent drug abuse and also treat it. Any parent or young person who is afraid of what drug abuse could do to their life will be more vigilant to avoid drugs. But fear also cripples us and is sometimes a hindrance to really living our life and accomplishing things.
We can't despair and simply throw our hands up and say we can't do anything about the drug problem in this country. Many people die every year from drug abuse, not just celebrities. We need to take action and fight back against the drug abuse in our country, among our celebrities, among our young people, and we need to provide help to those who need it.
Parents who are concerned about keeping their child off drugs have a big challenge ahead of them. With all the new names and types of drugs, parents may find all the information overwhelming, but with a little help, parents can eventually navigate through the details they need to know.
Denying a Problem
Ignorance is bliss, according to some people. Many parents take a hands off -"what we don't know won't hurt us" - approach to parenting, especially when it comes to teens and drugs . They feel that it is best if they don't make a big deal of things. They believe all kids are going to experiment with drugs at least once, so the best thing to do is let kids be kids and get it out of their system.
Talk To Your Teen
Studies show, however, that parents who do not talk to their kids about drugs or who are accepting of their child's drug experimentation end up with kids who do drugs - often in a dangerous way. Parents who talk to their kids, however, about the dangers of drugs are the voice that often influences the child so that they do say no to drugs. Parents need to be the first step in drug prevention for their child, and then continue to be aware and on the lookout for their teen to try drugs so they can get help if necessary.
Be Aware
It is important, therefore, for parents to have some knowledge of the current drug scene. This scares many parents, but it doesn't have to be intimidating. Just do a little research. Many parents know about age-old drugs like marijuana, heroin, cocaine, and LSD. They are aware that club drugs like Ecstasy and meth are out there, and that prescription drugs like OxyContin are becoming a huge problem. Parents may need to investigate further, however, to find out about the new synthetic drugs making their way around the country, such as bath salts and synthetic marijuana. These substances are trickier because they can be very misleading and sometimes even legal, yet just as harmful as illicit drugs. "It's chemistry. They're able to change the chemical structure just by small amounts to avert the law, even though it would have some of the same common properties and same psychoactive effects", said Bruce Reeve, of the Division of Criminal Investigations Crime Lab. (1)
Investigate the Topic
Parents can gather a lot of information by doing some quick Internet searches. The Internet provides a host of how-to sites on ways to make drugs, get drugs, and pass drug tests. If parents can access this kind of information, so can their teen, so it is important for parents to look for details about drug abuse in this way.
Parents can talk to local law enforcement or hospitals, or attend seminars that are designed to inform about drug trends. By doing a little investigating and talking to their teens, parents can feel confident in their knowledge of drug dangers that their child faces, in the hopes that they can help their child stay drug-free. Knowledge is power.
Prescription drug abuse continues to be a problem among the youth of our country. Teens are using the drugs for a variety of reasons, but they fail to see the seriousness of the problem.
Adolescents abuse prescription drugs more than just about any other substance. "For adolescents, prescription drugs are second only to marijuana as the most popular form of illegal drug use," says Steven Ungerleider, PhD., founding editor of The Prevention Researcher. "With 22% of high school seniors reporting that they have used nonmedical prescription drugs sometime in their lives, abuse of these drugs is a growing concern for parents and many professionals who work with youth." (1)
There are different reasons why teens abuse different prescription drugs. Some are taken purely for entertainment or to help them enjoy a party more. These prescription pills float around from student to student, sometimes without the user even knowing what they are taking. Pill parties are get-togethers where adolescents bring whatever drugs they could get from home or a relative's house, and take turns popping the pills and exploring the effects.
Performance Enhancement
Other teens have begun taking prescription drugs to enhance their performance at school. Medications that help people focus or increase energy so a student can stay up all night to study are the most commonly abused. Often with these kinds of drugs, students don't even see that it is wrong, because they see it helping out for a good purpose.
Meeting a Need
Still other teens take antidepressants, sleep aids, or anti-anxiety medication without a prescription to help with these kinds of mental health issues. While these teens may be in need of a real prescription because they do have a condition that warrants it, taking the drugs without a prescription is illegal and it can be harmful.
Dangerous and Illegal
Prescription drug abuse is a serious problem. Drugs can have fatal side effects, especially if taken in combination with other drugs or alcohol. Other drugs are so addicting that by abusing them when they are young, adolescents are setting themselves up for a life of addiction.
Because prescription medications come from a doctor, many adolescents still do not believe that taking them is wrong. Prescription drugs seem like a harmless way to have fun or to solve a little problem, and because of the great number of teens abusing these drugs and the ease with which the pills can be acquired, many don't see it as wrong or dangerous. We need to get the message out to our young people that prescription drug abuse is dangerous. The researchers at The Prevention Researcher conclude that "it is imperative that service professionals who work with adolescent populations be aware of this emerging and serious issue. Clearly, any substance use prevention programs that target adolescents must include information on nonmedical prescription drug use." (1)
We know that parents have great influence over their teen when it comes to experimenting with drugs or alcohol. New research suggests that teenage brains can actually form differently, based on the  drinking behavior of their parents. This helps to explain a little more about why some adolescents are at greater risk for alcohol abuse.
Prevention Talks
Parents today are learning how important it is for them to talk to their teen about substance abuse. Adolescents whose parents have ongoing conversations with them about not trying drugs or alcohol are up to 50% less likely to try these substances. Prevention definitely starts at home, and parents can make a conscious decision to be the first and most important step in prevention.
Role Models
The example parents set also affects an adolescent. Kids who grow up watching their parents abuse alcohol are more likely to abuse alcohol themselves at a younger age. Adolescents learn behaviors from their parents and, good or bad, will start following the example set for them.
The latest study, which is published in the journal Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, looked at the brain chemistry of teens in order to further understand the impact of parental influence. The small study out of Oregon performed MRI scans on adolescents who had no previous experience with drinking, but who were children of alcoholics. They found differences in the areas of the brain that control decision-making compared to teens with no family history of alcoholism. These young people showed weaker development in the decision-making areas of the brain, possibly putting them at risk for making poor choices with regards to drinking in the future.
Bonnie J. Nagel, assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral neuroscience at Oregon Health & Science University concluded, "Therefore, differences in brain activity may impact the ability of individuals family history of alcoholism to make good decisions in many contexts, and in particular may facilitate poor decision-making in regards to alcohol use. Taken together with other studies on youth family history of alcoholism, these results suggest that atypical brain structure and function exist prior to any substance use, and may contribute to an increased vulnerability for alcoholism in these individuals." (1)
This study only helps reiterate the important role parents play in keeping their children away from drugs and alcohol. Parents should first of all talk to their children regularly about the dangers of alcohol abuse. Secondly, parents need to set a good example for their teen by drinking responsibly. If a parent's drinking is out of control, they should seek help right away in order to provide their child with the best chance at living a sober life.
Drinking games and binge drinking are common among young people. College campuses are often settings for this kind of dangerous behavior, and school officials and parents worry about the safety of young people drinking to get drunk. That's why many people are upset about the number of websites that are dedicated to teaching young people the ins and outs of drinking games.
Knowing How to Drink Responsibly
The websites are all over the Internet, but one in particular is catching some heat in Maine. Launched last week by a former US Navy Chief and a former US Navy Fireman, the site lists various drinking games and how to play them. When asked about critics of the site, owner Jack O'Reilly said, "I served 23 years in the Navy, and you can bet we did a lot of drinking. And we played our share of drinking games too. No one ever got hurt; we had a lot of fun - but we could handle it." (1) Co-owner RJ Anayjuan agrees. "If you're not able to moderate your drinking, then you shouldn't drink. It doesn't matter whether you're playing pool, dancing at the club, or whether you're playing Kings. For instance, I'm not much of a drinker at all, but I've played my share of drinking games. I might only take a sip instead of a swill, or I might have nothing but water in my glass. Plenty of adults get together and have a great time with alcoholic beverages and never get rowdy or drive drunk or anything stupid." (1)
The site does have a disclaimer that states people shouldn't drink if they are underage, that they shouldn't drink and drive, and that the games "should only be played by responsible adults who are able to successfully and safely manage their alcohol intake. Anything less is irresponsible and this site cannot condone any other behavior." (1) The site also indicates that it will donate some of its proceeds to Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD).
Making Binge Drinking Appealing for Young Adults
That's not good enough, according to many viewers of the site and others like it. Other than one page of a simple disclaimer, there is no instruction on how to drink responsibly, or warnings that many young people die or are hurt from binge drinking every year.
The problem of binge drinking is still on the rise. An Associated Press analysis of federal records found that 157 college-age people, 18 to 23, drank themselves to death from 1999 through 2005. The number of alcohol-poisoning deaths per year rose from 18 in 1999 to 35 in 2005. (2) Many more people are injured or suffer consequences from binge drinking, such as unsafe sex and drug abuse. "There have always been problems with young people and alcohol, but it just seems like they are a little more intense now than they used to be," said Connie Gores, vice president for student life at Winona State. "The goal of a lot of them is just to get smashed." (2)
This year's list of the Top 30 Druggiest Colleges is out, and it is getting mixed reviews by colleges and students alike. While it might actually hold some sway for parents and their college-aged kids who are looking into colleges, most people dismiss the list as inaccurate and unreliable.
The Daily Beast, an affiliate of Newsweek, puts out this list every year, and every year readers are amazed and confused at the results. This year's "Top Druggiest College" is the University of Colorado at Boulder. No college wants the title, but this year's winner does not seem surprised at the results. Bronson Hilliard, a spokesman for the university, said the report doesn't provide any new information. "We're perfectly aware of this problem, and we've taken more measures to work against it in the last five years than in any time in the university's history," he said. (1)
An Unwanted Title
Other colleges that made the list this year or in the past are frustrated to be named, and criticize the Beast for coming up with the list. The University of New Hampshire is also on this year's list - number 19, which drops them down from number 1 last year. Still, school officials are not impressed. "These types of lists are good only for passing amusement, " said Anne Lawing, dean of students. "They are neither reliable or credible for UNH or any campus. We have always done our best to educate students about drugs (of which alcohol is the one that is most used) and provide high quality law enforcement. We will continue our efforts." (2)
Selection Criteria
Colleges first of all question the method the Beast uses to rank the schools. The three data points are: the "drug scenes" grade listed on College Prowler, a student-rating database; on-campus arrests for drug violations at each college; and each campus's surrounding environment, using data from the 2008-2009 U.S. Department of Human Services National Survey on Drug Abuse. (2)
Working to Keep Campuses Drug-Free
A school that works hard to enforce a zero-tolerance policy for drugs or is located in an area known for high drug rates may fall into an unreasonably high position, as Eckert College in St. Petersburg, Florida (ranked 12th) does. "They use our own data against us," Eckert Director of Security Adam Colby said of the Beast list. "If we decided we just wanted to turn a blind eye, we'd actually get a better rating. It's frustrating." (3)
While the list is unreliable and most people dismiss it as only good for entertainment, it may actually be harming the colleges that make the list. Parents may shy away from sending their child to a college that is listed as one of the "top druggiest" colleges. Students who are looking for a good time rather than solid academics may choose these colleges, bringing students onto the campus who are less than serious about education.
What this list can do is help colleges take a closer look at their student body and their enforcement practices to ensure they are doing everything possible to keep their campuses drug-free.
Topping this year's list is the University of Colorado, followed by Denison University. Dartmouth College came in third.
There has been a big push recently to focus more on treatment and rehabilitation for drug abusers and less on law enforcement and punishment for drug possession. While many people support drug prevention and treatment strategies, it is difficult to move a country in that direction that has spent 40 years pushing for stricter punishments.
Changes in Drug Policy
Drug Czar Gil Kerlikowski's office held a press conference on November 20 that helped clarify the Obama administration's stance on the issue. The bottom line he gave is: "We cannot arrest our way out of our nation's drug problem, and while new strategies are being implemented there is more to do." (1) Kerlikowski goes on to say that the government has tried to make the necessary change. "We've been at this now about two and a half years trying to begin this shift - helping people understand this Administration is approaching the drug problem in a very different way. We have not been as good at getting that message out... in educating people on issues around addiction as a public health concept and less as a criminal justice matter." (2)
According to Kerlikowski, the shift is going to occur as the government spends more money on prevention and treatment, and less on enforcement, and he encourages states to be open to the change. "I also encourage states to take our lead in support the funding of effective alternatives to incarceration. By implementing a range of innovative, yet proven public health and public safety interventions, we can save taxpayer dollars and improve outcomes and break the cycle of drug use, crime, and incarceration," said Kerlikowske. (1)
More Treatment, Less Jail
Yet, even with all the talk about treatment over jail time, the statistics are alarming, given the fact that incarceration for drug charges rarely changes lives. More than 1.6 million people were arrested last year on nonviolent drug charges, and the vast majority of these arrests were for low-level possession, not selling or trafficking. Almost half of these arrests - 750,000 of them - were for marijuana possession alone. (3) Statistics show that drug use costs our society $193 billion a year, $56 billion of which can be traced back to costs associated with the criminal justice system. (1)
Putting Money into Programs that Work
The scary thing is that drug use devastates individual lives and it devastates communities. The truth, however, is that drug addiction is a disease that can be treated. People can recover if they are given the right kind of help. We need to find a way to end the revolving door in and out of prison, as well as the "cradle-to-prison pipeline", as it has been dubbed. Now especially, if our country wants to be efficient in solving the drug problem, we need to do much more than simply throw people in jail.
There is much work to be done here. Debates rage over what drugs should be legal and which should be banned and how we should keep people from abusing any drug. We need to first of all educate our young people on the dangers of drugs and the consequences of doing drugs. Then we need to focus on helping those who have been caught up with drugs, including those who are headed to prison because of it.
African American and Asian teens have a lower rate of substance abuse than other races, according to a new study. The study was published in this week's Archives of General Psychiatry, and the results can help prevention and treatment programs determine which areas to target.
Statistics of Teen Substance Abuse
The study analyzed information from the annual National Survey on Drug Use and Health from 2005 to 2008, which is the most comprehensive ongoing study about substance abuse trends in the country. The data show that 48 percent of American Indian youth abused drugs or alcohol, putting them at the highest risk. They were followed by Caucasian teens whose rate of substance abuse was 39 percent, and Hispanics with a rate of 37 percent. African American teens (32 percent) and Asian teens (24 percent) were the least likely to abuse drugs or alcohol. (1)
The results are not what most people would expect. "What surprised us the most was the relatively lower rate of use among African Americans," said study author Dan Blazer, a professor of psychiatry at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, North Carolina. "The public perception is that that's not the case," (1)
This tells us that some inaccurate stereotypes have been made, especially about African American teens, and we would be more accurate to create programs that reach American Indian or Caucasian youth. "This study is an alert. We would like for people to be aware of the issue and the problem and be ready, hopefully, and willing to look at ways in which we can try to turn this around," said Blazer. "These data should suggest to any policy-making individual that we have a real problem and that problem doesn't manifest itself equally across all groups." (2)
Prevention for All Ethnicities
This does not mean we neglect the other teens. The numbers are high for all teens, and adolescents of every ethnicity can benefit from prevention programs. One in 12 teens reported having a substance abuse disorder, meaning their drug or alcohol use led to increased problems in the rest of their lives. These are the kids whose substance abuse interfered with school work, relationships, jobs, or finances.
Teen substance abuse is a problem that needs to be addressed. It is not simply a stage of rebellion that kids go through that will pass. 90 percent of adults who have a drug or alcohol problem started using before the age of 18. (1) "If you really want to reverse the abuse and dependence on these drugs," Blazer said, "what you need to do is start early, and focus on trying to get these young people into treatment, or catch them earlier and stop them from even starting." (3)
Today we will answer three more questions parents have about raising drug-free kids, this time focusing on parenting styles and protecting our kids. (Part 1)   (Part 3)
Should I watch my children closely or let them experience life and learn from their mistakes? Many parents struggle with this question because we've all seen the negative consequences of both strategies. Parents who never let their child experience things on their own or take responsibility for themselves will find that once their child is left on their own, they will rebel. On the other hand, a parent who lets their child learn about things like drugs and alcohol on their own, being influenced by media or peers, will find that their child will experiment and get into trouble this way. A middle of the road approach is best. Parents are there to lovingly guide their child, give them the tools, information, and encouragement to stay safe and productive, and then take a step back and watch from a distance. Parents should not feel guilty stepping in when their child makes the bad decision to try drugs ; in fact, an informed parent will stop substance abuse as soon as they find out about it, to keep it from causing even more problems.
Is it ever OK to let my child try drugs or alcohol when they are in the safety of our own home? The simple answer is no. Parents who let their teen experiment with drugs or alcohol while at home so they can be supervised are setting a poor example for their kids. A parent who lets their child try drugs or alcohol, even at home under close supervision, will cause confusion when they try to tell their child to say no to drugs at another time. After all, if a teen is allowed to do something at home, it must not be that bad. Let your message be clear; teens and adolescents should not experiment with drugs or alcohol at any time.
Should I lock up all controlled substances or is there a better way to keep my kids drug-free? Many parents face a never ending struggle when they try to keep all harmful objects out of their child's reach. Prescription drugs are a big temptation for teens these days, so it is wise to keep these pills in a safe place. However, it is impossible to keep everything that could be dangerous safely hidden away. Not only do parents need to worry about prescription drugs and alcohol, but also household substances that can be inhaled or "huffed". Parents should talk to their child about the dangers of abusing any substance, even ones found in their own home. Parents should definitely monitor their prescription drugs and household objects, but nothing should take the place of communicating with your teen. A well-educated, prepared teen will be more able to say no to drugs and dangerous teen trends.
All of the contents on TreatmentSolutionsNetwork.com including any images, text, external links, graphics or any other material posted on this website is intended solely for informational purposes. The information contained herein may be written by non-medical professionals and is not necessarily a substitute for professional medical advice, treatment or diagnosis of any disease or disability. Please seek advice from a qualified medical professional with any questions that you may have regarding your physical or mental health condition(s). If you are experiencing thoughts of suicide or any other medical emergency dial 911 or visit your local emergency room. The thoughts and views expressed in certain opinion articles are not necessarily those of Treatment Solutions Network, its owners, employees, or management.
Create a New Account
A password is needed for all subscriber types. It will be kept secure and can be retrieved easily if forgotten.
Which best describes you?
I am considering substance abuse treatment I am a Treatment Solutions Network alumni Consider me 'Friends and Family' I am a Substance Abuse Professional
We will highlight areas for you on the Treatment Solutions Network community based on how you identify yourself here. We may need to verify this information before granting you access to certain community tools.
None Monthly Newsletters Newsletters and Timely Updates
Stay informed and receive our Community Updates
"I understand that Treatment Solutions Network values my privacy and will not use any information in my profile beyond what I allow." (open privacy policy in new window)
Yes, you can also register a new account, tied to your preferred internet service above.