TAADAS Statewide Clearinghouse Free Literature Downloads
Because of funding cuts on a federal level, most of our literature sources have put strict limitations on distribution. Therefore, the Clearinghouse has made available some items in an electronic format so that you can print them directly from this website. Click on the title to download the publication. You will need Adobe Acrobat Reader to view these items. All items may be reproduced as needed.
General Information for Parents &amp; Caregivers
Do You Speak Teen? card Think you know your teens world? Think Again. This info card discusses teen text language. Includes an action item card for parents of teens. This item put out by the anti drug and AT&amp;T
15+ Sharing Cards (game) Easy Version / Hard Version / Coupons These cards feature discussion questions designed to foster communication between parents and their children. A question on each card is intended to encourage at least 15 minutes of conversation.  Three sets available.
Can I Borrow the Car?/Me Prestas El Auto Brochure Bilingual Version This pamphlet full of safe driving tips for parents and new teen drivers is written in Spanish and was developed by GEICO and the Media Campaign to help teens become responsible, drug-free drivers.
Growing Up Drug Free:   A Parents Guide to Prevention   46 pg book Growing Up Drug-Free outlines what children at various stages of development should know about drugs, suggests ways for parents to discuss drugs with their children, and recommends family activities to reinforce children's motivation to avoid alcohol and drugs.
Growing Up Drug Free:   A Parents Guide to Prevention (Spanish Version) 46 pg book Growing Up Drug-Free outlines what children at various stages of development should know about drugs, suggests ways for parents to discuss drugs with their children, and recommends family activities to reinforce children's motivation to avoid alcohol and drugs.
Keeping Your Kids Drug Free: A How-to Guide for Parents and Caregivers    56 pg book - Bilingual Version This guide covers challenges parents face, how they can influence their kids, opportunities for starting a discussion and what parents can do and say to keep their children drug free. It also provides a list of resources and ways for parents to get involved in community drug-prevention activities
Keeping Your Teens Drug-Free: A Family Guide Parents are the most important influence in their children's lives. This booklet provides ideas and examples of the skills busy parents and caregivers can use to keep their teens away from marijuana and other illicit drugs.
Keeping Youth Drug Free: 52 pg book This guide is designed for parents and caregivers of children ages 7 to 13. It focuses on six key steps that parents or caregivers can take to help their children grow up drug-free: establish and maintain good communication with their child; get involved in their child's life; make clear rules and enforce them with consistency and appropriate consequences; be a positive role model; teach their child to choose friends wisely; and monitor their child's activities.
Navigating the Teen Years: A Parent's Handbook for Raising Healthy Teens Endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics, this new handbook includes expert advice and information and easy-to-use checklists designed to help parents guide teens to a healthy life. The handbook provides suggestions for actions to take daily, weekly, or monthly, as well as setting expectations and rules, monitoring teens, and being a good role model.
Parents @ Work: A Free Program for Employers to Help Working Parents Designed for employers, this brochure highlights the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign and instructs employers on how to become involved. The campaign offers employers an easy way to provide free youth drug prevention resources to parents at work.
Parents, Speak Up! A Guide for Discussing Relationships and Waiting to Have Sex   13 pg book The Parents Speak Up National Campaign (PSUNC) encourages parents to talk with their kids about waiting to have sex.
Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents (8x11 version)   This second edition of the "Red Book" includes updated principles, new questions, new program information, and expanded references and resources based on the latest findings from NIDA-funded prevention research. The 16 fundamental prevention principles, derived from research on effective prevention programs, are outlined. Discussions include key factors that place youth at risk for drug abuse, guidance for planning drug abuse prevention programs in the community, applying the prevention principles to programs, and describing the core elements of effective prevention programs
This "In Brief" version provides highlights from the "Red Book" -- Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents: A Research Based Guide for Parents, Educators, and Community Leaders, Second Edition. It presents the updated prevention principles, an overview of program planning, and critical first steps for those learning about prevention. This shortened version therefore can serve as an introduction to research-based prevention for those new to the field of drug abuse prevention.
Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents (Spanish Version)  This "In Brief" version provides highlights from the "Red Book" -- Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents: A Research Based Guide for Parents, Educators, and Community Leaders, Second Edition. It presents the updated prevention principles, an overview of program planning, and critical first steps for those learning about prevention. This shortened version therefore can serve as an introduction to research-based prevention for those new to the field of drug abuse prevention.
Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents (pocket version)  Pocket version of the 16 fundamental prevention principles from the "Red Book" - Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents: A Research Based Guide for Parents, Educators, and Community Leaders, Second Edition
Supporting Your Adolescent   18 pg booklet Supporting Your Adolescent: Tips for Parents offers parents a general framework for understanding and supporting their child during adolescence.  It also provides guidance on recognizing signs that children might need help, locating and interacting with community resources that assist youth, and supporting children who are in trouble with the law.
Supporting Your Adolescent (Spanish Version) 18 pg booklet Supporting Your Adolescent: Tips for Parents offers parents a general framework for understanding and supporting their child during adolescence.  It also provides guidance on recognizing signs that children might need help, locating and interacting with community resources that assist youth, and supporting children who are in trouble with the law.
Talk With Kids About Violence Booklet The Talking With Kids campaign offers practical guidance in starting and deepening these important conversations, reminding parents that the most effective family communication about violence and other tough issues begins early and happens often.
Your Child Needs You! A guide to help your child lead a healthy, drug-free life.   - English Version This brochure for parents and caregivers provides information on becoming familiar with illicit drugs available today, talking with kids about drugs and alcohol, identifying the signs of drug and alcohol use, and intervening now if a child is in trouble. This brochure is also available in Spanish and Chinese languages.
Your Child Needs You! A guide to help your child lead a healthy, drug-free life.   - Spanish Version This brochure for parents and caregivers provides information on becoming familiar with illicit drugs available today, talking with kids about drugs and alcohol, identifying the signs of drug and alcohol use, and intervening now if a child is in trouble. This brochure is available in English and Chinese languages.
Your Child Needs You! A guide to help your child lead a healthy, drug-free life. - Chinese Version This brochure for parents and caregivers provides information on becoming familiar with illicit drugs available today, talking with kids about drugs and alcohol, identifying the signs of drug and alcohol use, and intervening now if a child is in trouble. This brochure is available in English and Spanish languages.
Keep Kids Alcohol Free: Strategies for Action   17 pg booklet This booklet describes three basic strategies for preventing alcohol use by children ages 9-15 and ways these strategies can be applied in the home, the school, and the community.   It has been designed as a starting point for parents, teachers, health professionals, law enforcement personnel, alcohol retailers, policy makers, and others who want to take action against early alcohol use.
Keep Kids Alcohol Free: Strategies for Action   17 pg booklet Spanish Version This booklet describes three basic strategies for preventing alcohol use by children ages 9-15 and ways these strategies can be applied in the home, the school, and the community.   It has been designed as a starting point for parents, teachers, health professionals, law enforcement personnel, alcohol retailers, policy makers, and others who want to take action against early alcohol use.
Underage Drinking Prevention Action Guide and Planner   61 pg book This Action Guide is intended to help communities create programs to prevent the tragedies that underage drinking can cause. This Action Guide is designed to: Provide community organizers with ideas and suggestions for accomplishable underage drinking prevention activities that target communities, businesses, social events, media, parents, and youth. Provide community organizers with ways to coordinate prevention efforts with government agencies, local groups, and other grassroots organizations. Provide factual information about the issues involved in the underage use of alcohol that can be disseminated through your prevention activities and help inform your audiences.  This item Single Copy Only.
What Parents Should Know About Ecstasy Fact Sheet Fact Sheet version of the booklet produced by the Partnership for a Drug-Free America.  In a relatively short time, Ecstasy has secured a prominent place for itself in the world of substance abuse. This booklet provides tips on the warning signs that your child could be using ecstasy and reminds of the tools you possess as a parent to keep your child drug free.
What Parents Should Know About Ecstasy Booklet - ENGLISH In a relatively short time, Ecstasy has secured a prominent place for itself in the world of substance abuse. This booklet provides tips on the warning signs that your child could be using ecstasy and reminds of the tools you possess as a parent to keep your child drug free. ENGLISH
What Parents Should Know About Ecstasy Booklet - SPANISH In a relatively short time, Ecstasy has secured a prominent place for itself in the world of substance abuse. This booklet provides tips on the warning signs that your child could be using ecstasy and reminds of the tools you possess as a parent to keep your child drug free. SPANISH
Inhalant Abuse: Your Child At Risk! (Cambodian) - Asian language initiative   booklet Written in both English and several Asian languages, this booklet provides parents with information on why young people use inhalants, what household items can be used as inhalants, the symptoms of inhalant use, slang terms for inhalants, the dangers of inhalants, and how to prevent inhalant use. A list of resources also is included.
Inhalant Abuse: Your Child At Risk! (Chinese) - Asian language initiative   booklet Written in both English and several Asian languages, this booklet provides parents with information on why young people use inhalants, what household items can be used as inhalants, the symptoms of inhalant use, slang terms for inhalants, the dangers of inhalants, and how to prevent inhalant use. A list of resources also is included.
Inhalant Abuse: Your Child At Risk! (Korean) - Asian language initiative   booklet Written in both English and several Asian languages, this booklet provides parents with information on why young people use inhalants, what household items can be used as inhalants, the symptoms of inhalant use, slang terms for inhalants, the dangers of inhalants, and how to prevent inhalant use. A list of resources also is included.
Inhalant Abuse: Your Child At Risk! (Vietnamese) - Asian language initiative   booklet Written in both English and several Asian languages, this booklet provides parents with information on why young people use inhalants, what household items can be used as inhalants, the symptoms of inhalant use, slang terms for inhalants, the dangers of inhalants, and how to prevent inhalant use. A list of resources also is included.
What Every Parent Needs to Know About Inhalant Abuse Spanish Version Pamphlet Describes what inhalant abuse is, warning signs, gives tips for talking to young children and teens about inhalant abuse. Also tells what to do in case of an emergency related to inhalant abuse.
Marijuana Information
Marijuana: Facts Parents Should Know ENGLISH   28 pg booklet Designed for parents, this booklet answers some of the most frequently asked questions about marijuana, provides the latest scientific information, and suggests ways to talk to teenagers about marijuana use. This is a companion booklet to the teen booklet called Marijuana: Facts for Teens.
Marijuana: Facts Parents Should Know Spanish Version 28 pg booklet Designed for parents, this booklet answers some of the most frequently asked questions about marijuana, provides the latest scientific information, and suggests ways to talk to teenagers about marijuana use. This is a companion booklet to the teen booklet called Marijuana: Facts for Teens.
Wake Up to the Risks of Marijuana: A Guide for Parents brochure This brochure outlines the facts of using marijuana and offers tips on what parents can do to keep their children from using marijuana. It also includes parent responses to clear up false information about the drug.
What Parents Need To Know About Marijuana (Vietnamese) - Asian Language Initiative   10 pg booklet This publication, part of the Office of National Drug Control Policy's Asian Language Initiative, offers facts and answers about marijuana. It educates parents about what it is, its physical and physiological effects, slang terms, and how it's used. It also identifies signs that indicate marijuana use, and provides tips for parents who want to prevent their children from using this drug. A list of organizations providing Asian language assistance and information is also included.
What Parents Need To Know About Marijuana (Korean) - Asian language initiative   10 pg booklet This publication, part of the Office of National Drug Control Policy's Asian Language Initiative, offers facts and answers about marijuana. It educates parents about what it is, its physical and physiological effects, slang terms, and how it's used. It also identifies signs that indicate marijuana use, and provides tips for parents who want to prevent their children from using this drug. A list of organizations providing Asian language assistance and information is also included.
What Parents Need To Know About Marijuana (Chinese) - Asian Language Initiative    10 pg booklet This publication, part of the Office of National Drug Control Policy's Asian Language Initiative, offers facts and answers about marijuana. It educates parents about what it is, its physical and physiological effects, slang terms, and how it's used. It also identifies signs that indicate marijuana use, and provides tips for parents who want to prevent their children from using this drug. A list of organizations providing Asian language assistance and information is also included.
Methamphetamine Information
Methamphetamine: Big Time Drug in Small Town America - 32 page booklet This booklet discusses what methamphetamine looks like, what it does to the body, what a lab looks like and provides county specific resources for reporting meth activity.
Meth Destroys Adult Booklet This colorful/graphic brochure is designed by Governor Bredesen and the District Attorney's Conference in Tennessee to help adults to educate youth about the hazards of methamphetamine.
Getting High on Prescription and Over-the-Counter Drugs Is Dangerous: A Guide to Keeping Your Teenager Safe in a Changing World booklet This brochure provides vital information to parents on how to keep their teenagers safe in a changing world. Prescription and over-the-counter (OTC) medications are fast becoming the new "party" drugs for many teenagers.
Getting High on Prescription and Over-the-Counter Drugs Is Dangerous: A Guide to Keeping Your Teenager Safe in a Changing World Spanish Version booklet This brochure provides vital information to parents on how to keep their teenagers safe in a changing world. Prescription and over-the-counter (OTC) medications are fast becoming the new "party" drugs for many teenagers.
"Choices: Helping Your Child Make the Right Ones" is focused on how to aid your child in making good life choices. It can help you learn the differences between protective factors and risk factors. With the help of a child development expert, "Choices" explores the risk factors that influence your child and offers sensible tips on reducing them in your child's life. There's also timely advice on promoting and strengthening protective factors.
Could Your Kid Be Smoking? Booklet This brochure is designed to help you figure out whether your children might already be smoking and offer some practical suggestions on what you can do about it. Remember, you have the right to intervene and the power to make a difference.
Educando a Los Ni os Para Que No Fumen Booklet  English Version   Spanish Version This bilingual adaptation of Raising kids who don't smoke was developed to provide Spanish-speaking parents of 10-17 year olds with insights and suggestions to help them talk to their kids about not smoking.
Get Into Your Kid's Head. Here's How. brochure Getting more involved with your preteen or teen today will help you stay connected tomorrow. In addition, your involvement will help your child make better decisions. This brochure offers parents 10 specific methods for staying closer to their preteens or teens, such as scheduling weekly time and sharing meals. The brochure also suggests way to help teenagers quit smoking.
"Grandparents: How to Help Keep Your Grandchildren Smoke-Free" provides a framework for open, productive and enjoyable communication between you and your grandchildren. As you continue to talk with your grandchildren about choosing not to smoke, remember that you have a unique opportunity to influence and guide them as they face tough situations in today's society.
"How to Talk to Your Kids About Not Smoking Even If You Do" tackles the sticky situation of getting your child not to engage in an activity you enjoy   smoking. It covers all the bases including the health risks associated with smoking, handling peer pressure situations with humor and grace, and why honesty is the best policy and the best place to begin your conversation with your child. There's even advice on what to do if your child is already smoking. Additional information and resources are listed in the back of the booklet.
Parenting Styles and Youth Smoking Fact Sheet Parenting styles change a bit with different situations. The approach you use most of the time can influence whether your children smoke. Find out what research suggests you can do to decrease the likelihood of your child smoking.
Peer Pressure & Smoking booklet Studies show that teenagers who have three or more friends who smoke are about 10 times as likely to use tobacco compared with teenagers who have no friends who smoke. This brochure was created to offer parents of 10 - 17 year olds information and tips to help their kids resist peer pressure to smoke.
Preventing Kids' Access to Cigarettes Fact Sheet One of the keys to preventing children from smoking is restricting their access to tobacco. As a parent, you can have more influence than you may think. Learn what you can do to help prevent your child from using tobacco.
Raising Kids Who Don't Smoke booklet This brochure was created to provide parents of 10-17 year olds a resource with tips, tools, and information to help make conversations with their kids about not smoking easier and more effective.
Talking to Pre-teens About Not Smoking Fact Sheet The younger people are when they start smoking, the more likely they are to become addicted. These tips are geared specifically for parents of pre-teens to help you be more effective when you talk to them about not smoking.
"Tobacco: Helping Your Child Say No!!" is designed for parents of adolescents. This guide takes you on a step-by-step process on how you can help your child make rights decisions right now. It gives practical advice on how to get your child involved in healthy activities, explains the effects of adolescent peer pressure, and how to talk to your child about not smoking. This booklet also covers the tough issues of why teens smoke, the law and underage smoking, and the health risks involved. The final section offers information on other free resources, as well as brief questionnaire for you and your child to get the discussion started.
The Tobacco-Free Sports Playbook: Pitching Healthy Lifestyles to Youth, Teams, and Communities  book This guide is filled with information and examples of successful tobacco-free policies, media campaigns utilizing celebrity athletes, and education programs to help kids say "No" to tobacco and "Yes" to better health. This easy-to-read guide was created to provide creative and effective ways to incorporate sports and physical activity programs into tobacco-free activities.