egypt in the third intermediate period 1070–712 b.c.)historyat
the death of ramesses xi the throne passed to smendes a northern relative of the high priest of amun smendes reign ca
1070–1044 b.c. initiated some 350 years of politically divided rule and diffused power known as the third intermediate period
the third intermediate period laid the foundation for many changes that are observable in art and culture throughout the first millennium
though its details are still not fully clear this period of egyptian history can be divided into three general stages
during the first of these dynasty 21 ca
1070–945 b.c. egypt was governed by pharaohs ruling from tanis in the eastern delta and by the high priests of amun ruling from thebes
relations between the two centers of power were generally good
the second stage began in 945 b.c. when the throne passed to a powerful family of libyan descent ruling in the eastern delta
egypt ’s erstwhile western enemies now became its rulers for the next two centuries dynasty 22 ca
945–712 b.c.
despite their libyan origin these pharaohs ruled as native egyptians
the first of them sheshonq i ca
945–924 b.c. is the most important
he appears in the bible under the name shishak the egyptian ruler who sacked jerusalem in year 5 of the reign of solomon ’s son rehoboam
under takelot ii ca
850–825 b.c. the control of dynasty 22 began to weaken and a new power center now known as dynasty 23 ca
818–712 b.c.)—arose in the eastern delta
the two dynasties governed egypt simultaneously for approximately ninety years the final stage of the third intermediate period
by the end of the eighth century b.c. egypt had fragmented further particularly in the north where a host of small local rulers held sway in the eastern delta osorkon iv ca
730–712 b.c. of dynasty 22 and iuput ii ca
754–712 b.c. of dynasty 23 in the western delta and memphis tefnakht ca
724—717 b.c. of dynasty 24 ruling from sais in hermopolis a local kinglet named namlot ca
740 b.c. and at heracleopolis another local ruler named peftjaubast ca
740–725 b.c.
preoccupied with internal rivalries during the third intermediate period egypt gradually lost its traditional control of nubia located to its south
about 760 b.c. an independent native dynasty began to rule nubia or kush from napata in what is now the sudan and extended its influence into southern egypt
in 729 b.c. the egyptian rulers namlot and tefnakht joined forces to extend their control farther into upper egypt
the nubian king piankhy perceived this as a threat to his independence and moved against the egyptian coalition
his invasion proved successful and the various egyptian rulers submitted to his leadership at memphis in 728 b.c. this event marked the inception of seventy five years of nubian rule in egypt
art and culture with the weakening of centralized royal authority in the third intermediate period the temple network emerged as a dominant sphere for political aspirations social identification and artistic production
the importance of the temple sphere obtained with more or less visibility for the ensuing first millennium
relatively little building took place during the third intermediate period but the creation of stylistically and technologically innovative bronze and precious temple statuary of gods kings and great temple officials flourished
temple precincts with the sanctity and safety they offered were favored burial sites for royal and nonroyal persons alike
gold and silver royal burial equipment from tanis shows the highest quality of craftsmanship
nonroyal coffins and papyri bear elaborate scenes and texts that ensured the rebirth of the deceased
new emphasis was placed on the king as the child son of a divine pair
this theme and other royal themes are expressed on a series of delicate relief decorated vessels and other small objects chiefly in faience but also of precious metal
the same theme is manifested architecturally in the emergence and development through the first millennium of the mammisi or birth house a subordinate temple where the birth of a juvenile god identified with the sun god and the king was celebrated
james allen department of egyptian art the metropolitan museum of art marsha hill department of egyptian art the metropolitan museum of art october 2004
citationallen james and marsha hill
egypt in the third intermediate period 1070–712 b.c.
in heilbrunn timeline of art history
new york the metropolitan museum of art 2000–. http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/tipd/hd_tipd.htm october 2004)further reading hill marsha deborah schorsch eds gifts for the gods images from ancient egyptian temples
new york metropolitan museum of art new haven yale university press 2007
taylor john
the third intermediate period 1069–664 b.c.
 in the oxford history of ancient egypt edited by ian shaw pp
330–68
new york oxford university press 2000