ancient egyptfor almost 30 centuries from its unification around 3100 b.c. to its conquest by alexander the great in 332 b.c.—ancient egypt was the preeminent civilization in the mediterranean world
from the great pyramids of the old kingdom through the military conquests of the new kingdom egypt ’s majesty has long entranced archaeologists and historians and created a vibrant field of study all its own egyptology
the main sources of information about ancient egypt are the many monuments objects and artifacts that have been recovered from archaeological sites covered with hieroglyphs that have only recently been deciphered
the picture that emerges is of a culture with few equals in the beauty of its art the accomplishment of its architecture or the richness of its religious traditions
predynastic period c. 5000 3100 b.c.)few written records or artifacts have been found from the predynastic period which encompassed at least 2,000 years of gradual development of the egyptian civilization
did you know
during the rule of akhenaton his wife nefertiti played an important political and religious role in the monotheistic cult of the sun god aton images and sculptures of nefertiti depict her famous beauty and role as a living goddess of fertility
neolithic late stone age communities in northeastern africa exchanged hunting for agriculture and made early advances that paved the way for the later development of egyptian arts and crafts technology politics and religion including a great reverence for the dead and possibly a belief in life after death
around 3400 b.c. two separate kingdoms were established the red land to the north based in the nile river delta and extending along the nile perhaps to atfih and the white land in the south stretching from atfih to gebel es silsila a southern king scorpion made the first attempts to conquer the northern kingdom around 3200 b.c. a century later king menes would subdue the north and unify the country becoming the first king of the first dynasty
archaic early dynastic
period c. 3100 2686 b.c.)king
menes founded the capital of ancient egypt at white walls later known as memphis in the north near the apex of the nile river delta
the capital would grow into a great metropolis that dominated egyptian society during the old kingdom period
the archaic period saw the development of the foundations of egyptian society including the all important ideology of kingship
to the ancient egyptians the king was a godlike being closely identified with the all powerful god horus
the earliest known hieroglyphic writing also dates to this period
in the archaic period as in all other periods most ancient egyptians were farmers living in small villages and agriculture largely wheat and barley formed the economic base of the egyptian state
the annual flooding of the great nile river provided the necessary irrigation and fertilization each year farmers sowed the wheat after the flooding receded and harvested it before the season of high temperatures and drought returned
old kingdom
age of the pyramid builders c. 2686 2181 b.c.)the
old kingdom began with the third dynasty of pharaohs
around 2630 b.c. the third dynasty ’s king djoser asked imhotep an architect priest and healer to design a funerary monument for him the result was the world ’s first major stone building the step pyramid at saqqara near memphis
pyramid building reached its zenith with the construction of the great pyramid at giza on the outskirts of cairo
built for khufu or cheops in greek who ruled from 2589 to 2566 b.c. the pyramid was later named by classical historians as one of the ancient world ’s seven wonders
two other pyramids were built at giza for khufu ’s successors khafra 2558 2532 b.c and menkaura 2532 2503 b.c.
during the third and fourth dynasties egypt enjoyed a golden age of peace and prosperity
the pharaohs held absolute power and provided a stable central government the kingdom faced no serious threats from abroad and successful military campaigns in foreign countries like nubia and libya added to its considerable economic prosperity
over the course of the fifth and sixth dynasties the king ’s wealth was steadily depleted partially due to the huge expense of pyramid building and his absolute power faltered in the face of the growing influence of the nobility and the priesthood that grew up around the sun god ra re
after the death of the sixth dynasty ’s king pepy ii who ruled for some 94 years the old kingdom period ended in chaos
first intermediate period c. 2181 2055 b.c.)on the heels of the old kingdom ’s collapse the seventh and eighth dynasties consisted of a rapid succession of memphis based rulers until about 2160 b.c. when the central authority completely dissolved leading to civil war between provincial governors
this chaotic situation was intensified by bedouin invasions and accompanied by famine and disease
from this era of conflict emerged two different kingdoms a line of 17 rulers dynasties nine and 10 based in heracleopolis ruled middle egypt between memphis and thebes while another family of rulers arose in thebes to challenge heracleopolitan power
around 2055 b.c. the theban prince mentuhotep managed to topple heracleopolis and reunited egypt beginning the 11th dynasty and ending the first intermediate period
middle kingdom
12th dynasty c. 2055 1786 b.c.)after the last ruler of the 11th dynasty mentuhotep iv was assassinated the throne passed to his vizier or chief minister who became king amenemhet i founder of dynasty 12
a new capital was established at it towy south of memphis while thebes remained a great religious center
during the middle kingdom egypt once again flourished as it had during the old kingdom
the 12th dynasty kings ensured the smooth succession of their line by making each successor co regent a custom that began with amenemhet i.middle kingdom egypt pursued an aggressive foreign policy colonizing nubia with its rich supply of gold ebony ivory and other resources and repelling the bedouins who had infiltrated egypt during the first intermediate period
the kingdom also built diplomatic and trade relations with syria palestine and other countries undertook building projects including military fortresses and mining quarries and returned to pyramid building in the tradition of the old kingdom
the middle kingdom reached its peak under amenemhet iii 1842 1797 b.c. its decline began under amenenhet iv 1798 1790 b.c. and continued under his sister and regent queen sobekneferu 1789 1786 b.c. who was the first confirmed female ruler of egypt and the last ruler of the 12th dynasty
second intermediate period c. 1786 1567 b.c.)the 13th dynasty marked the beginning of another unsettled period in egyptian history during which a rapid succession of kings failed to consolidate power
as a consequence during the second intermediate period egypt was divided into several spheres of influence
the official royal court and seat of government was relocated to thebes while a rival dynasty the 14th centered on the city of xois in the nile delta seems to have existed at the same time as the 13th
around 1650 b.c. a line of foreign rulers known as the hyksos took advantage of egypt ’s instability to take control
the hyksos rulers of the 15th dynasty adopted and continued many of the existing egyptian traditions in government as well as culture
they ruled concurrently with the line of native theban rulers of the 17th dynasty who retained control over most of southern egypt despite having to pay taxes to the hyksos
the 16th dynasty is variously believed to be theban or hyksos rulers
conflict eventually flared between the two groups and the thebans launched a war against the hyksos around 1570 b.c. driving them out of egypt
new kingdom c. 1567 1085 b.c.)under
ahmose i the first king of the 18th dynasty egypt was once again reunited
during the 18th dynasty egypt restored its control over nubia and began military campaigns in palestine clashing with other powers in the area such as the mitannians and the hittites
the country went on to establish the world ’s first great empire stretching from nubia to the euphrates river in asia
in addition to powerful kings such as amenhotep i 1546 1526 b.c. thutmose i 1525 1512 b.c. and amenhotep iii 1417 1379 b.c. the new kingdom was notable for the role of royal women such as queen hatshepsut 1503 1482 b.c. who began ruling as a regent for her young stepson he later became thutmose iii egypt ’s greatest military hero but rose to wield all the powers of a pharaoh
the controversial amenhotep iv c. 1379 1362 of the late 18th dynasty undertook a religious revolution disbanding the priesthoods dedicated to amon re a combination of the local theban god amon and the sun god re and forcing the exclusive worship of another sun god aton
renaming himself akhenaton servant of the aton he built a new capital in middle egypt called akhetaton known later as amarna
upon akhenaton ’s death the capital returned to thebes and egyptians returned to worshiping a multitude of gods
the 19th and 20th dynasties known as the ramesside period for the line of kings named ramses saw the restoration of the weakened egyptian empire and an impressive amount of building including great temples and cities
according to biblical chronology the exodus of moses and the israelites from egypt possibly occurred during the reign of ramses ii 1304 1237 b.c.
all of the new kingdom rulers with the exception of akhenaton were laid to rest in deep rock cut tombs not pyramids in the valley of the kings a burial site on the west bank of the nile opposite thebes
most of them were raided and destroyed with the exception of the tomb and treasure of tutankhamen c.1361 1352 b.c. discovered largely intact in a.d. 1922
the splendid mortuary temple of the last great king of the 20th dynasty ramses iii c. 1187 1156 b.c. was also relatively well preserved and indicated the prosperity egypt still enjoyed during his reign
the kings who followed ramses iii were less successful egypt lost its provinces in palestine and syria for good and suffered from foreign invasions notably by the libyans while its wealth was being steadily but inevitably depleted
third intermediate period c. 1085 664 b.c.)the
next 400 years known as the third intermediate period saw important changes in egyptian politics society and culture
centralized government under the 21st dynasty pharaohs gave way to the resurgence of local officials while foreigners from libya and nubia grabbed power for themselves and left a lasting imprint on egypt ’s population
the 22nd dynasty began around 945 b.c. with king sheshonq a descendant of libyans who had invaded egypt during the late 20th dynasty and settled there
many local rulers were virtually autonomous during this period and dynasties 23 24 are poorly documented
in the eighth century b.c. nubian pharaohs beginning with shabako ruler of the nubian kingdom of kush established their own dynasty the 25th at thebes
under kushite rule egypt clashed with the growing assyrian empire
in 671 b.c. the assyrian ruler esarhaddon drove the kushite king taharka out of memphis and destroyed the city he then appointed his own rulers out of local governors and officials loyal to the assyrians
one of them necho of sais ruled briefly as the first king of the 26th dynasty before being killed by the kushite leader tanuatamun in a final unsuccessful grab for power from the late period to alexander ’s conquest c.664 332 b.c.)beginning with necho ’s son psammetichus the saite dynasty ruled a reunified egypt for less than two centuries
in 525 b.c. cambyses king of persia defeated psammetichus iii the last saite king at the battle of pelusium and egypt became part of the persian empire
persian rulers such as darius 522 485 b.c. ruled the country largely under the same terms as native egyptian kings darius supported egypt ’s religious cults and undertook the building and restoration of its temples
the tyrannical rule of xerxes 486 465 b.c. sparked increased uprisings under him and his successors
one of these rebellions triumphed in 404 b.c. beginning one last period of egyptian independence under native rulers dynasties 28 30
in the mid fourth century b.c. the persians again attacked egypt reviving their empire under ataxerxes iii in 343 b.c. barely a decade later in 332 b.c. alexander the great of macedonia defeated the armies of the persian empire and conquered egypt
after alexander ’s death egypt was ruled by a line of macedonian kings beginning with alexander ’s general ptolemy and continuing with his descendants
the last ruler of ptolemaic egypt the legendary cleopatra vii surrendered egypt to the armies of octavian later augustus in 31 b.c. six centuries of roman rule followed during which christianity became the official religion of rome and its provinces including egypt
the conquest of egypt by the arabs in the seventh century a.d. and the introduction of islam would do away with the last outward aspects of ancient egyptian culture and propel the country towards its modern incarnation