Yesterday I came across another phone that parents can use to stay in touch with their kids if they are at school or out playing. This one is called Migo . Like FireFly it only allows for 4 contacts. Another popular option is TipTalk .
However, does an 8- 12 year-old child really need a cellphone? With these phones school-aged children ("tweens") get naturalized to mobile phones. The horrifying version of all this is Wherify , a phone that lets parents know (as in verify ) exactly where their child is located at any point in time. The horror, the horror: is this going too far ? The mobile child becomes an object of surveillance, a wireless version of the child on a leash. How about a feature that measures drug use by conducting a blood test of the child that uses the phone? The results could be texted directly to the parents. Wait a minute. Do children have any right to privacy?
Such tracking mania is only a few short steps removed from the office worker who gets a higher salary if she makes herself available via beeper or Blackberry. Wherify suggests a solution for social problems (e.g. .trust) with technical means (GPS). Just read this testimony in PC World: " I find this type of phone particularly useful since my husband and I are separated and on his custody time, he seems to take my son whereever he wishes without telling me where they are. I never know where he might be. "
On the PC World site parents applaud Whereify almost in unison and I can definitely see  the use value of it in many scenarios ( the peace of mind factor, for example). Children can get lost or get kidnapped and in these cases a cellphone is surely a great device. But the world may in fact be a much less frightening place than these cell phone companies suggest. It's a culture of fear that drives people to such technological fixes. Most public schools started to implement rules against cellphones (Michael Bloomberg, NYC's mayor, introduced this rule in New York and caused riots among parents). Ringtones in the classroom don't help. There is only one  commentator on the PC World blog that says: "What ever happened to being a child? "
According to SankeiWeb , Japanese geverment (Soum-sho) is planning to spend 1.2B Japanese Yen (about 10 million USD) to build "a system for watching kids" using mobile phones, GPS, RFID tags, etc. There'll soon be pilot tests in 20 regions across the country. The ministry (Soumu-sho) seems to be looking at systems that monitor kids' whereabouts using GPS-enabled mobile phones, RFID tags carried by kids, and RFID readers and communication devices installed at school gates and electric polls. Parents receive notifications when their kids pass nearby RFID readers; warning messages will be sent out when the kids enter a "dangerous area."