Popular Courses
Be kept up to date with new articles and info via email
Phobias take many forms from fear of flying to fear of buttons to fear of vomit. They usually appear irrational to the outsider and difficult to understand but to the person who has the phobia it can have a major impact on their life.
If you think about it, a phobia is an extreme form of protection. We are trying to protect ourselves from something we regard as life threatening. Consciously we can rationalise that we should not be so afraid but our unconscious is taking over and protecting us from something we think is ultimately going to kill us.
Those with phobias will avoid situations where they might meet the object of their phobia and in many cases, just thinking about the focus of the phobia can bring on the fear reaction.
Phobias can be learned from friends and family, for instance a fear of spiders.  If a parent is afraid of spiders then a child can learn that fear and it could develop into a phobia.
Phobias can develop as a severe response to something, such as fear of flying arising because of a particularly bumpy flight or fear of travelling by elevator triggered by being stuck in one. It could be linked to something that happened in childhood, such as playing hide and seek and getting stuck in a cupboard, which could develop into a phobia about being in small spaces, or of not being able to get out.
There are a number of different techniques that can be used to help reduce the 'fear' response and change how you feel about the trigger of your phobia so that you no longer respond in that way.
The most common phobias I work with are social phobia, fear of flying, spiders and needles, but the processes are effective for other phobias too.
The NLP technique the Fast Phobia Cure, sometimes called the rewind technique, hypno-desensitisation, CBH or regression are used to help resolve phobias.
To rid yourself of your phobia whether it's fear of flying, scared of spiders or nettled by needles, phone 0191 258 1229 for a face to face appointment.