Hypnosis And Phobias
There is a major link between hypnosis and phobias, and of course that link is simply that hypnosis can be used to treat phobias. In order to see that this is the case, we first have to look at the nature of both hypnosis and phobias. What we'll see when we do so is that both hypnosis and phobias affect the same part of the psyche, therefore, what is done with hypnosis can affect what phobias a person has.
Hypnosis and phobias are both affected by and have a major effect on the subconscious mind. For example, when you undergo hypnosis, you're using repeated sounds, feelings and ideas to tap into your subconscious where you can then leave behind minor suggestions or ideas.
Phobias are different, but they do involve the subconscious. Basically a phobia is when a fear becomes so lodged into the subconscious that it then proceeds to override all of your normal thoughts if it becomes triggered. As you might guess, this link between hypnosis and phobia is one of the reasons why hypnosis can be used to treat phobias.
In order to treat phobias with hypnosis, you have to think about the nature of both hypnosis and the phobias that you might have. For example, you need to know what it is that you're afraid of specifically. Once you've decided what you have a phobia about (and it should be fairly easy to determine) you can begin to set up your hypnosis routine that will reduce the effect that your phobia has on you, or even get rid of it altogether.
First, you need to make sure that you have a good place in your home where you will not be disturbed while you practice your hypnosis, and you also need to make sure that you will have enough time every day to work on hypnosis. After that, you need to decide on what suggestion it is that you're going to implant in your mind.
When it comes to suggestions, the general rule of thumb is that you want something that is going to be simple to remember, but that is also fairly specific to the problem that you're having. Both hypnosis and phobias are tricky things, so you need to make sure that you make it very clear as to what you're dealing with. After all, you'd hate to "cure" yourself of a phobia that you don't even have instead of dealing with the problem at hand.
Another thing to consider when dealing with hypnosis and phobias is that self-hypnosis may not be your best bet for treatment. If you don't think that it is, there are plenty of professional hypnotists who can help you with your hypnosis and phobias.
The other thing to consider about hypnosis and phobias is that when you're dealing with such an ingrained idea as a phobia, it will often take more than just a few days to get rid of the phobia. Therefore, it's important that you stick with your routine in order to reduce the effect that your phobia has on you. Don't get discouraged, instead stick with your hypnosis routine and wait to see if it helps!
Solve Your Fear of Dentists Do you dread going to the dentist? Fear of dentists is quite common and hypnosis can be used to help overcome it.
Conquer Your Fear of Heights It's perfectly natural to be afraid of heights. Without a fear of heights, we'd all be dare-devils. But for those occasions where you need to stop being scared, hypnosis can help.
Get Over Your Fear of Flying Air travel is often the quickest and sometimes the only way to get to places. Get over your fear of flying using simple hypnosis techniques.
Fear Of Public Speaking Public speaking is often feared more than death. Lots of people get nervous when called on to give a speech, so fear of public speaking is quite common. Hypnosis can help you overcome your fear.
End Your Fear of Rejection We've all faced rejection at some stage in our lives. But sometimes being rejected too many times can mean that we end up with a fear of rejection. Discover how to use hypnosis to overcome your fear.