If this is your first visit, be sure to check out the FAQ by clicking the link above. You may have to register before you can post: click the register link above to proceed. To start viewing messages, select the forum that you want to visit from the selection below.
Fear of Dogs
We have lived in our rural home for many years, and have always had dogs. Recently a neighbor moved in who has two little girls, one of whom is terrified of dogs. The neighbors have asked both us and another neighbor if we will get rid of our dogs.
Are we being selfish by keeping our dogs?
They knew when they moved in that we had dogs. We keep them inside when she is outside, and have offered to help her get to know our dogs, but she is just too scared.
I feel for this family but they have no right to ask or expect you to get rid of your pets. They need to get this little girl some therapy or perhaps start working with her to get her used to animals. No, you are not being selfish at all - those parents are by asking you to give up your pets.
No way are you being selfish! I actually think it's rude on their part to ask you to get rid of your dogs! I agree with mom2three! They should help their daughter face her fear instead of asking others to accommodate this fear. Getting to know friendly dogs is a great way for this girl to get over her fear.
Not to sound rude or anything, but it really is none of their business. If their child is afraid of dogs, then maybe they shouldn't live next to you lol. I just think that's a ridiculous thing for them to ask of you. I mean, what do they want you to do, move?!
No, you are not being selfish and I don't think you should even keep them in when she goes outside. The reason is that little by little she will get used to seeing them and will begin to realize that they won't hurt her. If I were her parents, I would get her a puppy. Most children can't resist a small puppy. If that didn't work, I would definitely take her to a therapist.
I am trying to be friendly with them. I think the mother may have fears also. I'd really like to help them in some way. We've been trying to play with our dogs in the yard, to show the neighbors how much fun dogs can be. The little girls will sometimes watch out the window. My son found the cutest puppy dog Halloween costume with big floppy ears. Maybe we'll invite them to go trick-or-treating with us!
This is a difficult question for me to answer as a dog is the cause of all my grandson's problems. However, even with this in mind we would not dream of asking a neighbour to change his or her life for our benefit. It's enough that you are aware of the problem, and that she even asked you could mean she is facing the issue. Perhaps she needs some encouragement to help her daughter (and as mentioned, herself) over this.
I would NEVER ask somebody to get rid of an animal, I can't believe peoples mindset these days! I would do what you are doing, by playing with them outside maybe they will overcome their fears. I like the Halloween idea, that's pretty funny! I was bit by a dog when I was little, but to this day I still love them!