Contact Rob
Quick Enquiry Form
Social phobia - Anxiety
Successful treatment for social phobia, the fear of being put on the spot, shyness, blushing, and feeling embarrassed in Poole, Bournemouth, Wimborne and Dorset using hypnosis and hypnotherapy.
This is best described as a feeling of being put on the spot, fear of being of being embarrassed, humiliated or judged. Symptoms may also include a feeling of being out of breath, almost like a panic attack , excessive perspiring and a feeling of anxiety .  A recent report in the U.S. concluded that up to 13% of the adult population suffer from this.
The D.S.M. IV (the mental health 'bible') lists social anxiety as: "A marked and persistent fear of one or more social or performance situations in which the person is exposed to unfamiliar people or to possible scrutiny by others. The individual fears that he/she will act in a way that will be humiliating or embarrassing.
For as long as I can remember I struggled with my anxiety and in my teens developed a full-blown social phobia. Despite 35 years going in and out of therapy talking to numerous therapists about how bad I felt, my symptoms kept getting steadily worse and I started to suffer from other nervous problems such as IBS and emetophobia. Then I tried hypnoanalysis and realised I had these really bad feelings that had been trapped inside my body for years. The therapy has helped me to get rid of these bad feelings and as a result my fear of 'being found out' and all the other awful anxiety symptoms I had are fading away. Its amazing, its like a mental detox - I feel as if I've been reborn and given a second chance at life!
All the best to you Rob, I really can't thank you enough! Julie.         Link to testimonial page
What does this feel like?
Situations such as social events like dinner parties, going out to meet other people or just going to the shops can prove to be a real nightmare for the social phobic. Their symptoms often include panic attacks , fear of being rejected, a feeling of not being good enough and being concerned how people see you. Blushing easily, no confidence, a lack of eye contact, are also common experiences.
Sufferers may also suffer from making phone calls and worry continually about a forth coming event.
There is often a fear of meeting new people, and the social phobic will keep their ideas and thoughts to themselves for fear of being ridiculed.
As stated earlier some of the physical symptoms experienced can be a panic attack, excessive perspiration, having dizzy spells, your heart pounding, or just being out of control.
What treatment is available?
Social phobia always starts in childhood and often the symptoms may get progressively worse as times goes by.
Analytical therapy (hypno-analysis) or a changing limiting beliefs course called The Thrive Programme, is an extremely effective way in helping a person to change their life. With the use of hypnosis and hypno-analysis the root cause of the anxiety can be located and so the negative emotions that surround the problem can be released thus dissolving the problem for good.
When the emotions are released the symptoms disappear and the result is a much more confident self assured outgoing person. Help for social phobia using hypnotherapy and hypnosis is available in Bournemouth, Poole and the surrounding areas of Dorset.
For any more information or to book a free initial consultation please call Rob on 01202 245020 or 07920 885015.
Covering Bournemouth, Poole, Parkstone, Oakdale, Corfe Mullen, Christchurch, Broadstone, Corfe Mullen, Wimborne, Creekmoor, Blandford, Ferndown, Canford heath, Wareham, Upton, Hamworthy, Swanage, Merley, Sandbanks, Westbourne, Branksome, Boscombe, Southbourne, Blandford Corfe Castle, Studland, Shaftesbury, Salisbury, Farnham, Six Penny Handley, Wimborne, Three legged cross, Fordingbridge, Pimperne, Tarrant Hinton, Verwood, Sturminster Newton, Horton, Tollard Royal and Compton Abbas in Dorset.