Our website uses JavaScript to achieve certain sophisticated features, visual cues, and styles. Please ensure that JavaScript is enabled when visiting our website for best results. Help: Windows | Mac
Resources for Students and Parents
A Guide to the Upper School for Parents
Whom to Contact with Questions About . . .
Getting an urgent message to your child during the day
Please limit yourself to genuinely urgent messages rather than routine communication. Remember that we require students to turn off cell phones between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., except in emergencies. Contact US Assistant, Annie Harness, who will post a note for your child on the message board. In cases of extreme emergency she will take a message to a student in person, but she will not interrupt classes to do so.
An Upper School Event:
Consult the calendar on the school website for information about Upper School events. Information about student life-dances, social events and retreats-is available in the Student Life section of the Upper School website. For further questions, contact the Dean of Students, Judy Cummins.
Your child's assignment
All assignments should be posted on the teacher's website. For questions about the specifics of an assignment, contact the teacher.
Absence from School-Illness, doctor visits, religious holidays, planned absences, etc.
Call the attendance line at 651-696-1410. For homework assignments, check the websites for your child's classes. If you need to discuss an extended absence, contact the Dean of Students, Judy Cummins.
The Attendance Policy
Check the US Handbook (available online) for the attendance policy. If you have questions about how the policy applies to your child's particular circumstances, contact the Dean of Students, Judy Cummins.
If your child becomes ill at school
Students should see the Dean of Students, Judy Cummins, who will call your parents and obtain permission for you to leave school. Students must sign out outside the Deanery.
An appointment during the school day
We encourage you to avoid scheduling appointments during class time; however, if it is unavoidable, students should bring a note to the Dean of Students at the beginning of the day for approval and sign out outside the Deanery.
Sports teams, athletics schedules, or athletic policies
Check the athletic section of the website for game schedules. For other questions contact Assistant-Athletic Director Mike Brown.
Dress Code
See US Handbook (available online) Daily Life-Dress Code section. For questions, contact the Dean of Students, Judy Cummins.
Lost books or other possessions at school
Report lost items to the Dean of Students. Check bins outside the Dean of Students' office and in library.
Advisory or your child's advisor
Your child's advisor or Dean of Students, Judy Cummins.
Whom to Contact with Questions About . . .
Check the teacher's website and contact the teacher first if you have questions about the content of a specific course. For questions or concerns about the curriculum in the Upper School, contact the Principal, Chris Hughes. If you have questions about the K-12 academic program, contact the Academic Dean, Cindy Richter.
Academic practices, procedures, and policies
Consult the US Handbook (available online) for guidelines and direct questions to Academic Dean, Cindy Richter.
Homework load
We ask teachers to give an average of 45 minutes of homework per class. If you have specific questions your first conversation should be with the teacher. If questions or concerns remain, contact the Principal, Chris Hughes.
Contact the teacher first if you have questions about a grade. If you have any questions or concerns about the teacher's grading policies or practices, contact the Principal, Chris Hughes.
Learning Challenges: learning disabilities, extended time and other accommodations, learning assessments
Learning Specialist Sarah Davies
Textbook purchases
The required book purchase list is posted in the Academic section of the Upper School website.
Schedule change requests
Academic Dean Cindy Richter
Transcript requests
Submit a signed Transcript Request Form, available on the website or from the Registrar (651-696-1315) or from College Counseling (651-696-1417).
Appropriate use of the laptop outside of the classroom during the school day
See US Handbook (available online) in the Daily Life-Electronics section.
Technology and laptops
US Technology Coordinator, Chris White
Conferences-fall and spring
See US Handbook in the Academic section (available online) for schedule. To request an alternate conference date contact Principal Chris Hughes.