1 Int roduct ion
1.1 Approaches to the eva luat ion o f NL sys tems
It is clear that a number of different criteria might be employed in the evaluation of Natural Language (NL) systems. It is also clear that there is no consensus on how evaluation should be carried out [RQR*88, GM84]. Among the different criteria that have been suggested are (a) Coverage; (b) Learnability; (c) General software requirements; (d) Comparison with other interface media. Coverage is concerned with the set of inputs which the system should be capable of handling and one issue we will discuss is how this set should be identified. Learnabi l i ty is premised on the fact that complete coverage is not forseeable in the near future. As a consequence, any NL system will have limitations and one problem for users will be to learn to communicate within such limitations. Learnability is measured by the ease with which new users are able to identify these coverage limitations, and exploit what coverage is available to carry out their task. The general software criteria of importance are speed, size, modifiability and installation and maintenance costs. Comparison studies have mainly required users to perform the same task using either a formal query language such as SQL or a restricted natural language and evaluated one against the other on such parameters as time to solution or number of queries per task[SW83, JTS*85]. Our discussion will mainly address the problem of coverage: we shall not discuss these other issues further.
Our concern here will be with interactive NL interfaces and not other applications of NL technology such as MT or messaging systems. Interactive interfaces are not designed to be used in isolation, rather, they are intended to be connected to some sort of backend system, to improve access to that system. Our view is that NL systems should be evaluated with this in mind: the aim will be to identi fy the NL inputs which a typical user would want to enter in order to uti l lse that backend system to carry out a representat ive task. By representative task we mean the class of task that the back-end system was designed to carry out. In the case of databases, this would be accessing or updating information. For expert systems it might involve identifying or diagnosing faults. °
I . I . I Tes t su i tes
One method that is often used in computer science for the evaluation of systems is the use of test suites. For NL systems the idea is to generate a corpus of sentences which contains the major set of syntactic, se-
- 116- mantic and pragmatic phenomena the system should cover [BB84, FNSW87]. One problem with this approach is how we determine whether the test set is complete. Do we have a clear notion of what constitute the major phenomena of language so that we can generate test sentences which identify whether these have been analysed correctly? Theories of syntax are well developed and may provide us with a good taxonomy of syntactic phenomena, but we do not have similar classifications of key pragmatic requirements. There are two reasons why current approaches may fail to identify the key phenomena. Current test sets are organised on a single-utterance basis, with certain exceptions such as intersentential anaphora and ellipsis. Now it may be that more complex discourse phenomena such as reference to dialogue structure arise when systems are being used to carry out tasks, because of the need to construct and manipulate sets of information [McK84]. In addition, context may contribute to inputs being fragmentary or telegraphic in style. Unless we investigate systems being used to carry out tasks, such phenomena will continue to he omitted from our test suites and NL systems will have to be substantially modified when they are connected to their backend systems. Thus we are not arguing against the use of test suites in principle but rather are attempting to determine what methodology should be used to design such test suites.
1.1.2 Field studies
In field studies, subjects are given the NL interface connected to some application and encouraged to make use of it. It would seem that these studies would offer vital information about target requirements. Despite arguments that such studies are highly necessary [Ten79], few systematic studies have been conducted [Dam81, JTS*85, Kra80]. The problem here may be with finding committed users who are prepared to make serious use of a fragile system.
A major problem with such studies concerns the robustness of the systems which were tested and this leads to difficulties in the interpretation of the results. This is because a fragile system necessarily imposes limitations on the ways that a user can interact with it. We cannot therefore infer that the set of sentences that users input when they have adjusted to a fragile system, reflects the set of inputs that they would wish to enter given a system with fewer limitations. In other words we cannot infer that such inputs represent the way that users would ideally wish to interact using NL. The users may well have been employing strategies to communicate within the limitations of the system and they may therefore have been using a highly restricted form of English. Indeed the existence of strategies such as paraphrasing and syntax simplification when a query failed, and repetition of input syntax when a query succeeded has been documented [ThoS0, WW89].
Since we cannot currently envisage a system without limitations, we may want to exploit this ability to learn system limitations, nevertheless the existence of such user strategies does not give us a clear view of what language might have been used in the absence of these limitations.
1.1.3 Pen and paper tasks
One technique which overcomes some of the problems of robustness has been to use pen and paper tasks. Here we do not use a system at all but rather give subjects what is essentially a translation task [JTS*85, Mil81]. This technique has also been employed to evaluate formal query languages such as SQL. The subjects of the study are given a sample task: A list of alumni in the state of California has been requested. The request applies to those alumni whose last name starts with an S. Obtain such a list containing last names and first names. When the subjects have generated their natural language query, it is evaluated by judges to determine whether it would have successfully elicited the information from the system.
This approach avoids the problem of using fragile systems, but it is susceptible to the same objections as were levelled at test suites: a potential drawback with the approach concerns the representativeness of the set of tasks the users are required to do when they carry out the translation tasks. For the tasks described by Reisner, for example, the queries are all one shot, i.e. they are attempts to complete a task in a single query [Rei77]. As a result the translation problems may fail to test the system's coverage of discourse phenomena.
1.1.4 Wizard of Oz
A similar technique to pen and paper tasks has been the use of a method called the "Wizard of Or" (henceforth WOZ) which also avoids the problem of the fragility of current systems by simulating the operation of the system rather than using the system itself.
- 117-
In these studies, subjects are told that they are interacting with the computer when in reality they are linked to the Wizard, a person simulating the operation of the system, over a computer network.
In Guindon's study using the WOZ technique, subjects were told they were using an NL frontend to a knowledge-based statistics advisory package [GSBC86]. The main result is a counterintuitive one. These studies suggest that people produce "simple language" when they believe that they are using an NL interface. Guindon has compared the WOZ dialogues of users interacting with the statistics package, to informal speech, and likened them to the simplified register of "baby talk" [SF7?]. In comparison with informal speech, the dialogues have few passives, few pronouns and few examples of fragmentary speech.
One problem with the research is that it has been descriptive: It has chiefly been concerned with demonstrating the fact that the language observed is "simple" relative to norms gathered for informal and written speech and the results are expressed at too general a level to be useful for system design. It is not enough to know, for example, that there are fewer fragments observed in WOZ type dialogues than in informal speech: it is necessary to know the precise characteristics of such fragments if we are to design a system to analyse these when they occur. Despite this, our view is that WOZ represents the most promising technique for identifying the target requirements of an NL interface. However, to avoid the problem of precision described above, we modified the technique in one significant respect. Having used the WOZ technique to generate a set of sentences that users ideally require to carry out a database retrieval task, we then input these sentences into a NL system linked to the database. The target requirements are therefore evaluated against a version of a real system and we can observe the ways in which the system satisfies, or fails to satisfy, user requirements.
We discuss semantics and pragmatics only insofar as they are reflected in individual lexical items. This is of some importance, given the lexical basis of the HPNL system. It must also be noted that the evaluation took place against a prototype version of HPNL. Many of the lexical errors we encountered could be removed with a trivial amount of effort. Our interest was not therefore in the absolute number of such errors, but rather with the general classes of lexical errors which arose. We present a classification of such errors below.
The task we investigated was database retrieval. This was predominantly because this has been a typical application for NL interfaces. Our initial interest was in the target requirements for an NL system, i.e. what set of sentences users would enter if they were given no constraints on the types of sentences that they could input. The Wizard was therefore instructed to answer all questions (subject to the limitation given below). We ensured that this person had sufficient information to answer questions about the database, and so in principle, the system was capable of handling all inputs.
The subjects were asked to access information from the "database" about a set of paintings which possessed certain characteristics. The database contained information about Van Gogh's paintings including their age, theme, medium, and location. The subjects had to find a set of paintings which together satisfied a series of requirements, and they did this by typing English sentences into the machine. They were not told exactly what information the database contained, nor about the set of inputs the Natural Language interface might be capable of processing.
2 Method
1.2 The cur rent s tudy
The current study therefore has two components: the first is a WOZ study of dialogues involved in database retrieval tasks. We then take the recorded dialogues and map them onto the capabilities of an existing system, HPNL [NP88] to look at where the language that the users produce goes beyond the capabilities of this system. The results we present concern the first phase of such an analysis in which we discuss the set of words that the system failed to analyse.
2.1 Sub jec ts
The 12 subjects were all familiar with using computers insofar as they had used word processors and electronic mail. A further 5 of them had used omce applications such as spreadsheets or graphics packages. Of the remainder, 4 had some experience with using databases and one of these had participated in the design a database. None of them was familiar with the current state of NL technology.
- 118-
2.2 Procedure hard copy.
The experimenter told the subjects that he was interested in evaluating the efficiency of English as a medium for communicating with computers. He told them that an English interface to a database was running on the machine and that the database contained information about paintings by Van Gogh and other artists. In fact this was not true: the information that the subjects typed into the terminal was transmitted to a person (The Wizard) at another terminal who answered the subject's requests by consulting paper copies of the database tables.
The experimenter then gave the details of the two tasks. Subjects were told that they had to find a set of paintings which satisfied several requirements, where a requirement might be for example that (a) all the paintings must come from different cities; or (b) they must all have different themes. Having found this set, they had then to access particular information about the set of pictures that they had chosen, e.g the paint medium for each of the pictures chosen.
3 Resu l ts
3.1 Preliminary analysis and filtering
This analysis is concerned with user input and so the Wizard's responses are not considered here. We began by taking all the 384 subject utterances, entering them into the NL prototype and observing what analysis the system produced. We found that by far the largest category of errors was unknown words, so we began by analysing the total of 401 instances of 104 unknown words.
Our interest here lay in the influence of the task on language use so we focus on 3 classes of unknown words which demonstrate this in different ways: these were operators and explicit reference to set properties; references to context; and references to the information source.
Our interest was in the target set of queries input by people who wanted to use the system for database access. We therefore gave the Wizard instructions to answer all queries regardless of linguistic complexity. There was however one exception to this rule: each task was expressed as a series of requirements and one possible strategy for the task was to enter all these requirements as one long query. If the Wizard had answered this query then the dialogue would have been extremely short, i.e it would have been one query and a response which was the answer to the whole task. To prevent this, the .Wizard was told to reply to such long queries by saying Too much information to process. There were no other constraints on the type of input that the Wizard could process and answers were given to all other types of query.
Subject and Wizard both used HP-Unix Workstations and communicated by writing in networked X windows. The inputs of both subject and Wizard were displayed in a single window on each of the machines with the subject's entries presented in lower case and the Wizard's in upper case, so the contents of the display windows on both machines were identical. To avoid teaching the subjects skills like scrolling, we also provided them with hard copy output of the whole of the interaction by printing the contents of the windows to a printer next to the subjeet's machine. If they wanted to refer back to much earlier in the dialogue, the subjects could consult the
3.1.1 Operators and the explicit specification of set propert ies
The task of database access involves the construction and manipulation of answer sets with various properties.
The unknown words that were used for set construction and manipulation were mainly verbs. These we called operators. They can be further subclassifled into verbs which were used to select sets, those which were used to permute already constructed sets and those which operate over a set of queries. The majority of operators invoked simple set selection: these included for example, state and tell. There were also instances of indirect requests for selection, e.g. need and want. Subjects tried to permute the presentation of sets by using words like arrange. Finally queries such as All the conditions from now on will apply to . . . show there were verbs which operated over sets of queries.
A second way in which these set manipulation operations appeared was in the subjects' explicit reference to the fact that they were constructing sets with specific properties. Find paintings that satisfy the following criteria . . . was an example of this.
Altogether operators and explicit reference to set
- 119- properties occurred on 102 occasions which accounted for 25% of the unknown words.
