Because of an increasing number of life-threatening allergies to all types of nuts, NCRC requests that no nuts or products with even traces of nuts be brought into the school. Nuts do not have to be ingested to cause a reaction. Swift and severe anaphylactic shock can occur if a child with  any nut allergy comes into any contact with nut oils.  Additional information and helpful suggestions will be sent home to parents of children who bring lunch to school.
Arrival &amp; Dismissal
We strongly encourage prompt arrival at the beginning of classes. Arriving at the onset of class supports each child's transition into the school day and avoids disruption to the other students.
For the safety of children and faculty, children will only be placed in vehicles on the curbside. In accordance with the traffic laws of the District of Columbia, teachers are not permitted to place a child into a vehicle without an appropriate child restraint device.
Traffic procedures are required to ensure safety, to show respect to our neighbors, and to ease traffic in the community. NCRC will provide detailed, written traffic procedures. By signing the enrollment contract, parents agree to comply with the procedures in effect. A copy of the current NCRC Traffic Procedures is given to each family at the beginning of the school year. Extra copies of these procedures are available in the office. Parents are required to sign a Traffic Agreement acknowledging their obligation to abide by the procedures.
Parents should check with their child's teachers about birthday traditions before sending in anything for the occasion. Party invitations, favors, candy, and holiday gifts should not be distributed via the classroom.
Board of Trustees
The Board of Trustees is responsible for governance of the school through creating and implementing a strategic plan, establishing and monitoring the budget, enacting policies and supporting development programs. Board members are primarily current or former school parents who serve a three year term. Current Board members are listed on the school's website. Questions or suggestions about the Board of Trustees should be directed to the Board Chair.
In the spring or summer, each child is placed in a class for the fall based on her/his educational and developmental needs. We seek to balance gender, ethnic, racial and economic diversity, age span and personality differences in each class. These factors, plus the recommendations of teachers and the support team, determine the class assignments at NCRC. Consideration will be given to parent requests for placement in a particular class, should an appropriate space be available.
Class Schedule
AM classes begin at 8:30 a.m. and end at 11:30 a.m. PM classes begin at 12:40 p.m. and end at 3:30 p.m. Full day classes begin at 8:30 a.m. and end at 3:00 p.m.
The Early Bird program offers supervised child care for students from 8:00 a.m. until classes begin. Enrollment is open to all children enrolled in AM, Explorer or Treetop classes. The optional Lunch Bunch Program is available for Rainbow and Sunshine AM and PM class children.  The optional Mi Casa Uno Program is available Mondays and Wednesdays or Tuesdays and Thursdays for Sunshine and Rainbow class children. Mi Casa Dos is on Wednesdays and Fridays for Treetop and Explorer children. The Later Gator Program provides after school care for all PM, Explorer or Treetop students who wish to enroll.
Calendar &amp; School Closings
School Calendar
Key dates such as staff professional days, parent conferences, vacations, and Parent Association Events (e.g. Auction, Pumpkin Party, Pajama Party) are set prior to the beginning of the school year. Anyone proposing additional school-wide events should discuss the proposal with the Head of School and, if appropriate, the Chair of the Board of Trustees and/or the President of the Parent Association.
Emergency Weather Closings
When the District of Columbia public schools close because of a weather emergency, NCRC will close. NCRC will also close when the streets around the school are hazardous to the safety of children and families. The school may open late or close early due to weather conditions or other unforeseen emergencies. Parents will be notified of school closings and late openings via email using the e-alert system and via an emergency announcement on the school's website. If school is closed, the main phone line's office voice mail will also carry the message.
Other School Closings
If unforeseen circumstances require changes to the school calendar, families will be notified immediately. The school reserves the right to change the calendar to protect the health and safety of students and/or staff. Should this happen, the school will make every effort to adjust the calendar to ensure that the highest quality education program is provided to the children.
Staff Professional Development Days
Professional development for staff is an important part of NCRC's mission. Faculty participate in workshops and attend lectures on a variety of topics related to early childhood education and curriculum development. Days set aside for staff professional development during the year are included on the school calendar. Please mark these days in your calendar. Children do not attend school on Professional Development days.
Special Days
Special holidays, patriotic and religious days are discussed as part of the school curriculum. Secular aspects and historical facts are presented. Parents are invited to share information and participate in classroom activities on these occasions.  Parents should speak with classroom teachers prior to the occasion to ensure that activities are developmentally appropriate.
Clothing at School - What to Wear
Preschool is for learning through active and creative play. Your child needs washable, comfortable play clothes. Shoes should be sturdy, with non-slip soles, made for running and climbing. Crocs and flip flops should not be worn to school. We suggest selecting clothes that encourage your child to dress independently. When school begins, each child brings a complete change of clothing to be kept on hand for emergencies. Please label all clothing.
Lost and Found items will be held for 30 days on the ground level of the school near the kitchen.
Every Thursday, school notices (class letters, the Head of School's communication, Parent Association information, etc.) are either posted on the school's website or sent via email. Additional information about school events, lectures and other items of interest to parents will be posted on the school's website and on a parents' bulletin board at the school.
Should you have a comment, question or concern about classroom practices, please begin by bringing it to the teaching team's attention. Questions about other aspects of the school should be addressed to the appropriate staff member. Parents are invited to schedule appointments with the Head of School at any time.
Teachers, in collaboration with the Head of School, develop curriculum that ensures a sound progression of concepts and skills appropriate to each class. Each teaching team communicates goals and activities through their class newsletter and notes to parents. The NCRC Curriculum: A Curriculum for Everyone and other professional books and materials are available for perusal.
Discipline shall always be constructive and developmentally appropriate including guidance and management techniques such as redirection, brief separation from the problem situation, talking about the situation and praise for appropriate behavior. Our goal is to develop self-management skills.
Children are gently guided toward appropriate behavior by experienced faculty, the support team and the Head of School. Each child's developmental level is considered regarding behavioral expectations; parents are our partners in setting and carrying out behavioral goals. Parents may be provided with additional support by the school's counselor, Head of School, support team, and teachers if necessary.
Developmental Screenings - Evaluations
Screenings for vision, hearing, speech/language and physical skill development are scheduled annually. The Head of School, the school's counselor and support team will involve parents fully if additional evaluations should be indicated in any developmental area.
Fundraising Policy
All fund raising activities are governed by the mission, policies and strategic plans of the Board of Trustees, and by the practices and procedures of the Development Committee and Development Office.  Fundraising  campaigns and community-building events are usually scheduled well in advance and carefully spaced throughout the school year. New ideas or suggestions are welcomed and should be directed to the Chair of the Development Committee and/or the Development Director.
Gifts to Faculty
There are no organized class gifts for faculty at the holidays. Please be thoughtful about gift-giving. Our faculty appreciates that you show your gratitude in any way that you deem appropriate, but it is not required. Giving gifts is a personal and individual choice for parents. If parents choose to give a gift at any time to a faculty member, please leave it at the front office. A group end-of-the-year class gift for teachers is coordinated by room parents from remaining Activity Fee funds.
Your child's health and safety is of paramount concern to us. If a child is hurt or becomes ill, we will need to be in touch with you immediately. Please be sure that your telephone numbers are up-to-date and that we can reach a real person, not just voice mail, in case of emergency.
The District of Columbia requires that families provide medical information for any child enrolled in school. For your child to attend NCRC, the DC Health Certificate and DC Oral Health Assessment forms must be on file and updated annually.  Children with out-of-date health or dental certificates will not be allowed to attend classes.
Serious contagious conditions, such as strep, conjunctivitis ("pink eye"), or chicken pox, should be reported immediately. Children may return to school only when the condition is treated and the child is not contagious. NCRC will notify other families in the class of any serious contagious condition.
Please let us know when your child is not coming to school. Teachers like to know why your child is out so they can understand your child's physical and emotional needs when he/she returns to school.
Our children enjoy playing outdoors except in extreme weather, so please dress your child accordingly. Please keep your child at home if he/she is unable to participate fully.
If your child is not feeling well before school, and particularly if he/she has fever, diarrhea, vomiting or an upset stomach, please keep your child home. A child should be symptom-free and have a normal  temperature  for 24 hours without the aid of medication before returning to school. Should your child become sick at school, he/she will be moved to a comfortable area away from the other children. We will notify you immediately and expect you to make arrangements for picking up promptly. In case of injury which requires your attention, we will contact you immediately.
Parents need to tell the school about specific conditions that may require emergency treatment, such as allergy to food or bee stings, asthma or other health concerns. If your child's situation requires specific emergency treatment or medication, you need to provide detailed instructions with signed permission to administer the specific treatment.
Medicine and a Medical Authorization must be delivered by an adult to the school. The medicine must be in the original prescription container clearly marked with your child's name, the name of the medicine, the dosage, and the name and telephone number of the child's physician. No medicine or treatment except emergency first aid can be given without a medical order or prescription from a licensed physician and your written consent. The faculty member administering medication will maintain a medication log recording the administration details such as name of medication, date, time given and any reactions observed.
Our library collection includes children's books and DVD's, and a parents' lending library. Organized by our librarian and parent volunteers, the library is a movable feast for young learners. Books may be borrowed by teachers for their classes and by children for reading at home. We also have a collection of therapeutic backpacks for home use when families face issues of loss, change, or trauma.
Motor / Movement
The primary goal of the motor program is to meet the developing motor needs of young children through enjoyable activities that foster self-confidence. The motor program is planned and implemented by the motor teacher and supported by the teaching teams.
NCRC offers a professionally designed and led music program appropriate for young children. The program integrates movement, songs, rhythm, instruments, chants, dance and poetry. Music flows through all our classes throughout the week as part of our curriculum, often coordinated with motor and movement skills.
Non-discrimination Policy
NCRC admits students of any race, color, national and ethnic origin to all the rights, privileges, programs and activities generally accorded or made available to students at the school. It does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, gender, national and ethnic origin in administration of its educational policies, admission policies, tuition assistance, or any other school-sponsored programs.
The Parent Association plays an active role in the life of the school. The PA organizes special events, runs the annual action, coordinates the room parent program and seeks to incorporate your talents and energies into the life of the school. Participation in PA activities benefits your child and the school.
Parent Conferences
Parent/Teacher conferences play an important role in sharing information about your child's progress in school. We view conferences as a wonderful opportunity to exchange information and to engage your participation in planning educational goals for your child. Your questions or concerns are welcome. Our teaching teams schedule half-hour parent conferences in early fall and spring. In addition, you are welcome to set up a meeting with the teaching team whenever the need arises.
The teaching teams prepare a written progress report for each child at the end of the school year.
Parent Participation
Parent participation in the classroom and school activities is encouraged at NCRC. Parents and grandparents are invited to participate in classroom activities, whether sharing a special book, a family tradition or a personal skill. Please check with the teachers first to make sure your visit can be arranged at a convenient time.
Respectful Community
All adults (faculty, parents, caregivers, and guests) have the responsibility to model respectful and cooperative behavior. Positive and constructive working relationships built on direct and honest communication ensure that the best interests of the children will be obtained in a warm and nurturing community.
In accordance with DC health regulations, children in all-day programs are required to rest daily for a period of one hour. Children are permitted to bring a small blanket or towel.  Pillow pets, large stuffed animals and toys from home should not be brought to school for rest. Teachers provide books, books on tape and quiet music during rest.
Nutritionally balanced snacks are offered daily. If requested, an alternative snack will be provided for any child with food restrictions. If desired, you can provide your own snacks for your child. Be sure to tell your child's teachers about any food allergies or special diets, as well as reporting this information on the emergency authorization form.
Children eating lunch at school should bring their food in a clearly labeled lunch box. NCRC does not heat or refrigerate children's lunches. Please be cognizant of our goal to teach children about good health and environmental sustainability.
SOS (Speech/Language-Occupational Therapist-Social Emotional) NCRC Support Team
Three specialists work with classroom teaching teams throughout the year. Specialists include: the school's counselor, speech/language pathologist, and occupational therapist. The speech/language pathologist and occupational therapist conduct screenings and, in collaboration with the teachers, define and integrate goals and objectives for individual children. The school's counselor works with the specialists, the teachers and the children. She conducts social/emotional groups for the older children, visits all children in the classrooms and at times invites children to play in her office when families are undergoing a change (a new baby, a new house, an illness or a death). She is available not only for children, but also for parents. The school's counselor will suggest referrals for counseling or therapy needs. The counseling library has books for both children and adults that cover a variety of concerns.
The support team assists with appropriate class placements and developmental screenings and evaluations. In addition, each child's developmental progress is carefully monitored, allowing early identification of developmental needs to be addressed. All members of the support team welcome the opportunity to consult with parents.
Student Records
Any parent or guardian of a child enrolled at NCRC has access to the child's permanent record. If you wish to review your child's record, please contact the Head of School's office.
The school will not disclose information concerning an individual child or the child's parent(s) or guardian(s) to persons other than the school faculty or government officials acting in the course of their duties, unless the parent(s) or guardian(s) grant written permission for the disclosure, or unless disclosure is necessary in an emergency situation.   During the year, teaching teams prepare recommendations for children applying to ongoing schools. Recommendations are sent only to schools specified by the parents. These recommendations are confidential and are not part of a child's permanent record. Students with Special Needs
Throughout its history, NCRC has fostered and promoted the education of young children with developmental delays and specific learning needs. Children with special needs are included in all NCRC classes. In order for the inclusion program to be successful the identities of the children with special needs are confidential, and the children are simply part of the class.
Sometimes teachers invite children to bring books, tapes or items of interest from home to share with their classmates. Please label personal items and avoid sending anything of great value or sentiment. Otherwise, you can help your child remember that toys remain at home.
Tuition Assistance
NCRC's mission includes our commitment to a diverse, respectful community. The school's definition of diversity includes socio-economic diversity. On the evening of the Tuition Assistance Auction, we express our appreciation for the mission and values of our preschool as we gather with the entire NCRC community in a spirit of joy and celebration. All proceeds from the Auction are dedicated to tuition assistance. Families should contact the Tuition Assistance Coordinator in the Business Office for application materials and a copy of NCRC's tuition assistance policy.
Classroom Webpage/Email/Voice Mail/Social Media
Each classroom has a class webpage where teachers post the class schedule, classroom news, announcements and newsletters. The password to access the classroom webpate is sent to parents at the start of the school year.
Each classroom has a voicemail message box and a classroom email address. These are excellent ways to be in touch with your child's teachers. Often teachers will not have an opportunity to check their voicemail or email until the end of the day. Should your message require immediate attention, please leave it with the receptionist. In addition, teachers may be contacted by email according to the guidelines set by the classroom teachers.
Parents also are encouraged to pin notes to the outside of the child's bag if there is information that needs to be communicated to classroom teachers.
Social Media
The growth and expansion of "social networking" technology provides multiple ways for people to connect. It also creates the potential to impact work and social relationships, and can possibly raise conflict of interest, unequal treatment, discrimination or similar concerns. NCRC's policy prohibits staff from initiating or accepting "friend" requests from current, former or prospective parents.
All visitors to the school must sign in and out at the reception desk. Visitors will be given a badge to wear on campus. We welcome families and friends to our classrooms. Please make arrangements in advance with the teachers.