School Resources
Attendance is very important. Since time is precious and there is so much to teach, it is imperative that students attend Religious School regularly. Frequent absences create difficulties in keeping up with the class and may be discouraging for the child. Excessive absences tend to lower the status of the Religious School in the eyes of the child and negate our efforts. They may also jeopardize the child's eligibility to become a Bar or Bat Mitzvah .  It is therefore the child's responsibility to make up any missed class work.
Please alert the school at 858-535-1111 (ext.3121) if your child is ill, on vacation, or otherwise unable to attend class. The school will contact parents after two consecutive absences. Parents are responsible for either telephoning or sending an e-mail to the school regarding the student's absences.  More frequent absences may result in a conference between the teacher, education staff, and the parents to determine the next course of action. Please help students be on time for class and tefillah .   It is respectful and important for learning, making friends and feeling a part of our community. In an effort to increase on time arrivals, there will be a fun program for 3 rd - 6 th graders who arrive 10 minutes early each class day.
CELL PHONES AND IPODS must be turned off during class and services.No electronic devices are permitted in class or at services. If they are confiscated during this time they will be held in the office until after school.
LOST AND FOUND : Check the Religious School office for items lost at school. Labeling books and clothes is always helpful.
SCHOOL VISITORS : Adults should feel free to visit the Religious School classrooms and programs with permission from the Director of Religious School Education. Please contact the office in advance so we can confirm with the teacher and make them aware that you will be attending class. Children who are not enrolled in our Religious School may attend only in pressing circumstances with the advance consent of an administrative staff member, and with a parent's written permission .
PROGRESS REPORTS : Progress reports for grades K - 6 will be mailed home twice a year. Please sign and return them after the first semester.
SPECIAL NEEDS : If your child has any special needs, including dietary restrictions, learning difficulties, or emotional or psychological concerns, it is important that you tell our Faculty Coordinator/Special Needs Consultant Debbie Rabin, so that the teacher may be informed and your child will get the proper care and attention.  Only those who need to know about your child's special needs will be in the circle of information. If your child has an IEP, please provide a copy to the School Office if it can help the Religious School to better serve the needs of your child.
EARLY PICKUP : Our first priority is the safety of the children. Students may not leave the Temple grounds unless accompanied by an adult. For an early pickup, go to the School Office to sign out your child.  This is a safety precaution so no one other than a familiar adult comes for your child.
GEMILLUT CHASADIM/TZEDAKAH : (righteous acts of loving kindness; the giving of charity). Our tradition teaches that giving to others who are less fortunate is a mitzvah (a commandment). Please help your children to get into the tzedakah habit by reminding them to set aside some of their money each week. Students will have an opportunity to direct their class tzedakah (collected on Sundays) by discussing different options.
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
Our goal at Beth Israel is to provide a safe educational climate in which each child will discover and cultivate a meaningful Jewish identity and commitment. "Standards of Behavior" are required of each student in this school in order for each classroom to operate smoothly and without undue interruptions. In order to meet these goals, we feel it is important for each student to be accountable and responsible for his/her own behavior.
Erev Shabbat Services
Join us every Friday evening to welcome Shabbat with song, prayers and blessings. These services often feature notable speakers and the beautiful music of our Youth and Teen Choir, Adult Choir and Chai Band.
Shabbat Services
Most Saturdays Congregation Beth Israel holds Shabbat services in the mornings at 10:00 a.m. and afternoons at 4:00 p.m. in our beautiful Glickman-Galinson sanctuary. These services celebrate the Bar/Bat Mitzvahs of our members and are open to the entire community. Please join us and celebrate Shabbat!
© 2011 Congregation Beth Israel of San Diego | 9001 Towne Centre Drive, San Diego, CA 92122 | Contact Us