"KKEL nurtures the child's natural love of learning and fosters mental and physical achievement by encouraging the child's healthy participation in the world around him. Academia provides knowledge but the learning and life skills honed by the encouraging way of education will lead to a responsible and rewarding adult life. We are extremely happy to be able to discover and trust our heart in making the best academic selection for our kids, as loving attention only breeds independence, individuality and good character. Thanks KKEL."
Deepa Calcuttawala (Parent of Shayaan and Sufia Calcuttawala, Kangaroo Kids Preschool, Pali Hill, Mumbai)
"As parents we always try to give the best to our children. For us, the best school is the one where our kids love to go, the school where our children learn inclusiveness, develop their creativity and grow in all aspects (social, mental, emotional) of their lives. Billabong High is one such school. We are happy to see our kids going to Billabong."
Rosina Hussain Jasami (Parent of Kaamil &amp; Fiza, Grade V and Grade III, Billabong High International School, Santacruz, Mumbai)
"'Billabong' was just a name of one of many schools when we were shifting base to Mumbai with our family last year. We were only concerned about putting our son in a good school. We decided on Billabong and we are pleased that we made the right choice. Our son was new to the city did not know how to read and write Hindi; and of course, he did not have any friends. In Billabong, we got the co-operation and support to help the child adjust to the new environment. The teachers and students share a relationship which is hard to find in any other school. The overall growth, both physical and mental, makes them independent individuals, who are capable of making their own choices!"
Gargi & Subhobroto Chakraborty (Parents of Sounak Chakraborty, Grade V, Billabong High International School, Santacruz, Mumbai)
"Billabong High is an educational institution of a special kind; it is a school that includes basic values in a way that is naturally imbibed by the child. It is a gurukul that nurtures in every child the fundamental tenets of how to enhance your life with education. Last but not least, it is an institution par excellence that blends theory and practice very well to create an atmosphere of 'learning with fun'. Our child is enjoying herself and growing as a person every day in school. The only issue is that she will never be comfortable in any other school. But that is Billabong High's unique value proposition!"
G.S. Sundara Rajan (Parent of Poojita Sundararajan, Grade V, Billabong High International School, Santacruz, Mumbai)
"My son, being a slow learner, was able to get the required environment where he could get the appropriate support to address his specific needs. This helped him gain confidence and concentrate on developing his overall personality, not limited to academics. As parents, we found the approach of the counsellors and special educators proactive, interactive and supportive, which chanellized all efforts towards my child's overall growth. This meant peace of mind to us as well as to the child."
Kuldeep Sharma (Parent of Vinayak Sharma, Grade III, Billabong High, Malad, Mumbai)
"Kangaroo Kids has been one of the developing milestones in the early stage of my child's life. Since he was very young he had not developed his vocal abilities which he did with help of the faculty of the school. He has become more interactive, outgoing and smarter. We are very satisfied with the progress of our child's performance and are looking forward for a more educative and interactive next year."
Anirudh Jalan (Parent of Naman Jalan, Nursery, Kangaro Kids Preschool, Guwahati)
"As educators ourselves, we feel we have a fairly accurate insight in evaluating the quality of care provided by Kangaroo Kids. We feel there is a very open, friendly and purposeful atmosphere and are impressed by the caring and professional approach of the staff. We appreciate the regular and specific feedback that we receive about our son. The staff is always available to discuss any concerns/issues and we have been impressed by the way these conversations have been followed up. They are an extremely hardworking team who deserve merit for their efforts. Keep up the good work!"
Ajay & Rajni Bhoopal (Parents of Nipurn Bhoopal, Playgroup, Kangaroo Kids Preschool, Guwahati)
"Choosing Billabong was the best decision that I made for my children. Here, children really learn without pressure. Also what they learn is not peripheral but stays with them. My children have become confident, responsible and social all thanks to Billabong. At Billabong, each child is really special; I can vouch for it."
Rashmi. J. Sharma (Parent of Vedant Sharma &amp; Tanmay Sharma, Grade V and Grade II, Billabong High International School, Anand)
"I want to compliment your school and teachers for the excellent curriculum offered to students and efficient teaching methods adopted by teachers. KKEL has set very high standards of learning. Concepts of mammals vs. reptiles, functioning of internal organs and shadows are not normally taught in other international schools at this grade. As a parent, I was thrilled to see Parth 'established' in all aspects of the assesment (shared by teachers at the PTM). Parth is able to communicate the essence / crux of the concepts that he has learnt at school. This clarity has been possible due to efficient teaching methods adopted by teachers. Also, the methods are so refreshing that Parth thoroughly enjoys the learning process. This approach and tutelage will certainly facilitate academic excellence and personality growth of students."
Anjali Rajendra Shende (Parent of Parth Shende, studying in Jr. Kg. Division F)
I have been very worried about which school to put my boy in and I am really happy I chose your school. Johnathan has  been home schooled till now and has never been to any school before.He has not been exposed to the outside world and it was very important for me to pick the perfect school that would help  mould him become a well rounded, responsible individual.   At this point I'd like to mention the administrator, Ms Verma, who showed me around and bravely put up with the barrage of questions I threw at her.She was very impressive. I remember thinking that if the administrator is so nice, the teachers have gotta be good.   The classrooms were bright and cheerful with child friendly furniture. The bathrooms had cute little toilet bowls and basins which my boy loved. It seemed the school had been designed by someone who cared about children. Later, I met with one of your coordinators,  Ms Shrutika, who helped me decide that Jr KG would be best for Johnathan. She was also very nice, kind and patient.   I'd like to add that Johnathan's teacher Ms Amrita also has been very kind to him. In fact she just called to let us know that Johnathan had a stomach ache. Please do thank her for all her efforts. It is so reassuring to know that you guys will call if the child is in any kind of discomfort at all. You seem to have a very good staff in place. Everybody, right from Ms Laxmi at the front desk to Ms Forum have been very very sweet. Even the female security officer is pleasant and polite.   Congratulations on running such a great school with such a nice staff and such a reasonable fee. As I had mentioned earlier, I have researched all the good schools in Mumbai and you people seem to be simply the best.   Please feel free to call me if you need me to contribute and volunteer in any way.   Cheers
Amrita Simon D'souza (Parent of Jonathan Simon D'souza, studying in Jr. Kg. Kangaroo Kids)
My daughter Naysha recently completed her life's first six months of schooling. I thought it was indeed time to pen this letter and express my gratitude for the hard work and efforts that you and your teachers put in each day.   To be honest, I have had to overcome immense personal anxiety in handing the responsibility of my child to an entity outside home. Thankfully, all my anxieties and worries have turned out to be totally unfounded. Seeing the positive changes in Naysha, I am truly convinced of my decision to enroll her in your school and the teaching values that your school adheres to.   Naysha was a very shy and quiet child until she started attending playschool. Given her solitary nature, my wife and I would constantly worry about how she would ever open up to people and make friends. However, beyond the first two weeks that Naysha took to adjust to the totally new environment at Kangaroo Kids, she has enjoyed each and every day of school. She looks forward to go to school and to the interactions with her teachers and classmates. To my surprise, she even discusses it fondly at home.   I really appreciate the way in which teacher! s helped her with activities that she always dreaded (painting with colors, group activities etc come immediately to my mind). By making the classes so friendly, innovative and cheerful, you all helped her develop a keen liking for these activities. I also thank you all for encouraging her to participate in events (such as the recently concluded Sports Day, the field trips etc), which she thoroughly enjoyed.   As a parent, I have found the teachers and school administration to be very receptive to my concerns and proactive at resolving them. At the risk of sounding repetitive, I again would like to share my compliments and thanks for all your wonderful efforts!
Nikhil Kapre (Parent of Nyasha Kapre studying in Jr.Kg at Madhapur, Kangaroo Kids)
Very inspiring session this morning. Very motivating indeed. Proud to have my daughter in Kangaroo Kids - Bhopal. Best part firstly in the session was of the positive thoughts &amp; messages in mrng. 2nd was the sharing of days for working couples. Me Heading a Media Group work for 7 days &amp; my wife has her own business. After today's meeting we decided that i will spare Sundays for my daughter &amp; my wife Tuesdays. No work on these days-only we will spend time with her. 3rdly -great philosphy that 10 mins of homework in Std 1, 20 min in 2nd ....Gradually they will not feel the load. I am happy &amp; thankful to Praveen ji also who made us meet u. Nice person, he called me few days back &amp; told me that Dheeraj, you are not giving/sparing/spending time with your daughter. He was correct &amp; so was his analysis. My daughter Tanishka Mihi Varma at nursey age was becoming a shopaholic -trust me. I had everything for her except time. This has changed from today as it's Tuesday &amp; my wife is with my daughter now for the whole day.
Meeting with you is a 'U' turn for me &amp; my family. Wish Kangaroo Kids-Billabong best wishes from heart.
Dheeraj Verma (Parent of Tanishka Verma studying in Nursery at Bhopal, Kangaroo Kids)