It's hard to overcome shyness as a child. Millions of children are considered to be shy to one degree or another. There are many reasons for it and ways that you can successfully go about helping your child through it. Shyness may be with kids for a short period of time, or may be part of their personality for their entire lives, but it doesn't have to affect their lives in a negative way.
To help a child overcome shyness requires parents to have an understanding of the trait, knowledge of what works and what doesn't, patience, and determination. Building self confidence in your child doesn't happen overnight; it takes a gradual process of encouragement and positivity for kids to overcome shyness. We have both the information and the resources to help parents navigate the waters of shyness in children.
Dealing with a Shy Child
Do you have a shy child? You are not alone! Our resources, articles, and parenting tips on shyness are specifically written to help the parents of a child who is shy. This behavior trait affects preschoolers, elementary aged kids, tweens, and teens. While there's no instant solution to turn your shy child into a leader with self-confidence, focusing your time and attention in the correct manner are the keys to being on the right track.
After you have checked out our parenting tips on overcoming shyness, use our free behavior charts and tools to start making progress. Both the parent and the shy child should be involved with putting the plan into action. Set your goals together, talk about the accomplishments of the day and the week, and celebrate all victories. If your child has already been in counseling, or if kids are having trouble overcoming extreme shyness, some parents turn to therapy or family counseling for help overcoming shyness . Don't hesitate to ask for feedback from other parents of a shy child, as they have most likely dealt with the same problems you are facing.
Overcoming Shyness in Children, 1-2-3
First and foremost: love your shy child.
Let the child know that you love them no matter what, and that you want the best for them in life.
Just like any significant and lasting change, overcoming shyness doesn't happen overnight .
Learn about the causes of shyness in children.
Keep communications open between parents and kids.
Set goals and track progress (behavior charts can help with this).
Congratulate your child even on small accomplishments, as those are steps towards overcoming shyness.
Ask your child for updates on how their social interactions are going, even as things are getting better.
Stay positive!
As parents one of our main goals is to guide our children into becoming happy, well-rounded adults. Overcoming shyness is an important step towards this goal. Helping a shy child deal with their insecurities is a good opportunity to encourage healthy communication skills and positive assertiveness. Don't go it alone, and don't just guess on how to best take on shyness. Take advantage of our parenting tips, resources, and tools to make the smoothest path to progress. Utilize the information and features of this website to help your child overcome shyness.
Once each month, Kid Pointz will randomly choose a member to receive a $100 Amazon Gift Card. The member will be emailed and requested to respond within 7 business days. If the member does not respond, another member will be chosen at random and notified in the same manner. This process will continue until a member responds.
Amazon.com is not a sponsor of this promotion. Amazon, Amazon.com, the Amazon.com logo, and the Amazon Gift Cards logo are trademarks of Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates. Amazon.com Gift Cards ("GCs") may be used only for purchases of eligible goods on Amazon.com or its affiliated website Endless.com. GCs cannot be redeemed for purchases of gift cards. Except as required by law, GCs cannot be reloaded, resold, transferred for value, redeemed for cash, or applied to any other account. See www.amazon.com/gc-legal for complete terms and conditions. GCs are issued and (c)2011 by ACI Gift Cards, Inc., a Washington corporation.