Parents Club
The PMS Parents Club is responsible for encouraging the cooperation of parents, teachers and students to help sustain and grow the school's educational and social milieu. To that end, the PMS Parents Club coordinates volunteer efforts throughout the school year, funds enrichment, general education and extracurricular programs, administers teacher grant programs and serves as the interface between the school and families through monthly board meetings, parent education forums and the distribution of weekly and monthly communications to parents.
Piedmont Middle School relies heavily on PMS Parents Club support and parent volunteers. In 2009-10, over 77% of PMS families joined the PMS Parents Club, over 40 parents served in leadership roles on the PMS Parents Club board, and hundreds of parents supported the school by volunteering for field trips lunch duty support, room parenting, or and numerous middle school activities and events.
Join PMS Parents' Club
Memberships are $60 and include a copy of the indispensible Piedmont Student Directory, as well as e-mail copies of our weekly PMS Bulletin. Extra directories can be purchased for $15. For membership information, please contact Lindsey Meyersieck, PMS Parents' Club Membership Coordinator at 655-0629.
Monthly PMS Parents' Club Meetings
PMS parents, regardless of Parents Club membership, are welcome and encouraged to attend the monthly PMS Parents Club board meetings. Attendance at PMS Parents Club board meetings is a great way to stay connected with the PMS community and learn about issues facing PMS students. They are held at 8:30 am on the 2nd Friday of each month (with a few exceptions) in the District Boardroom at 760 Magnolia. Click here for the 2009-10 PMS PC Meeting Schedule . If you are unable to get to a meeting, but want to stay updated, meeting minutes are accessible on line at  PMS Meeting Minutes .
PMS Parents' Club President Sarah Pearson
Dear Parents,
Although most of the activity at Piedmont Middle School involves the students and staff, the PMS Parents' Club plays an important part too, and I am writing to invite you to jump in and help. Specifically, we support the school with financial contributions, we volunteer our time and energy to facilitate the various programs, and at our monthly Board meetings we dialog with the staff and other parents about ways to best serve the middle school community.
As Parent Club President, I feel incredibly fortunate to work side by side with such capable, caring, creative and truly inspiring parent volunteers, so I feel pretty confident promising you that you'll find volunteering at PMS fun and deeply satisfying. Whether helping in the library, serving lunch, chaperoning dances, or driving on field trips - these are all opportunities to get a sense of the middle school experience, and to get to know some of the remarkable teachers and staff that we are fortunate to have at PMS.
You and all parents are always welcome at our Parent Club Board meetings. In particular, the two Thursday evening meetings (on November 18 and April 7) will be geared toward addressing issues of widespread interest to parents. Typically the administrators and the counselors give an update of what's going on, so it's a great way to stay in the loop. I will meet with Principal Jeanne Donovan at the beginning of every month, and am happy to share your concerns with her. Please know that she, Assistant Principal Dan Bonin, and the wonderful counseling staff are also directly accessible to you. They are very interested in supporting all parents in every way they can so please don't be shy about approaching any of them. But please do think about who can help address your concern most directly. Usually the teachers are the closest to the kids, and so in general we encourage you to contact them first.
Please show your support by joining the Parent Clubs of all the schools that your children attend ($60 per school). As you know, the funds are the mainstay of our Parent Club budgets and essential for programs at all the schools. If you would like to learn more about any aspect of the Parents Club Board, please feel free to call me or any of the board members listed in the back on the Student Directory on the Piedmont Middle School Parents' Club page. To learn more about general volunteer opportunities, please contact Volunteer Coordinators Wendy Szczech (658-2228) or Michelle Eldridge (655-5833).
For any general questions or concerns, please feel free to contact me or the Parent Club Vice-President, Mary Kelly (594-8226). We are here for you!
We look forward to working together to do all we can to make the middle school experience the very best it can be for our kids, our teachers, and for you.
Dear Parents and Guardians of 7th Grade Students, The American Heart Association has called for a national effort to train individuals to perform CPR. Alameda County's response to this challenge is the CPR 7 program. In Alameda County only 30% of the victims that sustain cardiac arrest receive CPR in the critical minutes before professional help arrives. Without [...]
Only material shown on this official Piedmont Unified School District web site is approved by the District. The District is not responsible for information placed on other web sites not established by the District that may relate to our schools or students.