When I first learned about The Little Looster I had one of those, "why didn't I think of that" moments.  The truth is, The Little Looster was created by a mom of 3 who saw a need and filled it!  If you have kids that are potty training or are on the cusp of potty training, you really need to check this out.
Monica came up with the idea of the Little Looster Booster when she had one child potty training, one crawling around and another in her arms.  Her potty training child did not feel supported by the standard step stool in front of the potty and she didn't have time to mess with cleaning out the little potty (besides, who wants a crawler getting into that).  Her original solution was to duct tape 3 regular step stools together in order to provide the support for her child.  After seeing the success that came from her original creation, she decided to create something for parents every where.
Graham actually requests to use the stool even at the age of 4.  He just feels more comfortable with it.  The design is a horse shoe shape that extends all the way around the toilet.  It was created to stay in place by providing ample room for adults to put their feet over the stool when sitting or under when standing.  I like the fact that we don't have to find a separate location to store the stool in our already cramped house.  My only complaint is that it is a little bit too big for our tiny bathroom.  I realize that we probably have an abnormally small guest bathroom, so this is a complaint that many of you may not have.  The Little Looster works great in our larger restroom.
You can purchase The Little Looster for $34.99 online.  Also, if you are a fan of the concept, make sure to give Monica a quick vote in the Born by Mom contest !  She made the top ten!  Go, Monica!
This product was provided free of charge by The Little Looster. These are my honest opinions on the product. I do not post reviews on products I can not stand behind. Please see my Terms of Use for more info. Subscribe to Go Graham Go! by Email as well as follow us on Twitter !
1. Pampers Swaddlers Sensitive : If you plan on using disposables, these are the softest on the market. 2. Diaper Champ : No diaper pail is perfect, so you might as well buy the one that will cost you less in the long run.  Use your own trash bags in these. $30. 3. The First Years Sure Comfort Deluxe Newborn to Toddler Tub : Long name for a seriously simple, yet effective product. $20. 4. Safety First Soft Spout Cover :   You really can't beat the price tag on this one!  So many spout covers are either hard or don't fit.  Don't wast your time or money and try this one first. $3.  If you have no luck you're only out $3 and I suggest trying the Moby. $15. 5. Baby Bjorn Potty Chair : High back, arm rests, your toddler feels secure. $30. 6. Baby Bjorn Little Potty : Perfect for traveling when your child is not quite ready for the public toilet (or you don't have time to make it to one). $15.
If you are looking for a potty chair that is simple but functional, look no further than BabyBjorn.
I purchased the regular sized Potty Chair when ever Graham first started potty training . I read the reviews and decided that it was the best for my money for what I was looking for. Now, there are no extras on this potty which was great for me! We have limited space in our bathroom so I needed something that would work without all the bells and whistles!
What I love about the regular sized Potty Chair is the fact that the center portion comes up high! If you have a boy, this is going to be important to you. I found that with several others the center portion just was not generous enough. Graham also seems to be found of how high the back is. If you have a toddler who is full speed ahead this can come in handy! There have been several times when Graham runs and sits down as fast as he can. If there were no back, he would've fallen right off! The center portion lifts out so that you can dispose of the waste easily. The bottom is no skid which also helps when you have a busy toddler! Graham also seems most comfortable on this chair. It is shaped to be inviting to a little ones proportions !
A friend of mine gave me her Little Potty by BabyBjorn when her kids were through with potty training. It has the same high center portion without the back. It comes in handy while we are traveling. I keep this in my car at all times! It does not lift out in the center, but it is a smaller version of the regular Potty Chair which works great for us!
You can purchase the regular sized Potty Chair for about $27.99 and the Little Potty for about $12.95 .
There are not very many products that I would say you just HAVE to have, but, if you have a toddler boy, you HAVE to have the Peter Potty! This toddler sized urinal has become a lifesaver for us.
Before the Peter Potty we were dragging a step stool to the toilet. Not only does it get in the way, but it is also heavy and inconvenient when you have a toddler that has to go! You also have to be very careful that little hands are not being smashed in the toilet lid. The Peter Potty puts an end to all of this and creates less mess!
This smart potty can either be placed on the stand provided or hung on your wall. The height is completely adjustable no matter how you choose to display it. There is a sliding mechanism on the back that allows you to adjust according to your own child. The Peter Potty has actually helped speed up the potty training process in our home. It is much easier when the child can do things with as little help as possible. It is also fun for them to flush it! I truly feel like the Peter Potty has a bit of an empowerment quality to it for boys.
See it in Action:
There are no batteries required. Simply fill up the top lid of the Peter Potty and place it back on the unit. Press the green button on top to flush and pull the green container from below to dispose. Simple and quick! The Peter Potty retails for $39.99 and has won the iParenting Media Award as well as the iParenting Media HOT Award.
It is potty training central around here lately! I have decided not to get really serious about it until I am out for the summer, but we are still working on it! It was hard for me to know what type of potty chair to go with. There are some people who are for the seat you put on top of the toilet and others swear by having a separate potty chair. Because Graham is 2, we thought the actual chair would be easier for him to maneuver and feel successful on.
By now, you surely know about Boon Inc and their innovative and stylish products. We had the opportunity to try out the Boon Potty Bench . It is called a bench because it is much more than just a potty! As soon as I pulled it out of the box Graham was intrigued by it. He immediately lifted the top cover and asked, "Go potty?".
What sets this potty apart from the others is the fact that it is multi-functional serving also as a step stool or chair! You could literally store this in your living room without it screaming, "I'm a potty"! The Boon Potty Bench also has two sides that open and close to provide storage. You can hang your toilet paper as well as keep some favorite potty books or toys within arms length. I also love the fact that the potty part pulls out like a drawer so that you can easily dispose of the contents.
I will say that the orange cup that is designed to help little boys keep their mess going into the potty needs to be designed differently. I'm not sure if it needs to be wider or if the actual part the child sits on needs to dip down some, but sometimes it fails to do its job. All in all, this truly is a great little potty when you think about all you are getting out of it. Simply close it when your child is done and place it in front of the sink for a step stool.
See it in Action:
The Boon Potty Bench retails for about $34.99 and can be found at Babies R Us, Target and other locations near you.
We are in the "pre" potty training mode around here! All I hear is story upon story of how "messy" it is going to be! When I stumbled across the Flippee I knew it was worth looking into!
The Flippee basically creates a urinal for your child. It forms a shield that stops messes and even flips down out of the way for convenient storage! Another plus is that the makers of the Flippee were brilliant enough to think about the fact that there could be "excess". The Flippee has a special "Drip Lip" inside to catch those! The Flippee retails at $24.95.
That's right! I'm already claiming this bad boy as my own! Come to me little potty bench! Seriously, enter to win this (even though I'm going to win) at The Mom Buzz ! I never thought I would be so excited about a potty, but I have read the reviews on this one and it was between the Boon or the Baby Bjorn! So if I win it then I won't have to decide!
This chair has compartments galore for storage which is another plus! I have read some complaints about the hole being to small. I guess we shall see once I win it!
"The Potty Bench from Boon is a training potty featuring two enclosed side storage spaces for organizing potty training supplies, and a pull-out drawer for easy sanitary clean-up. Simply close the lid to use as a large, sturdy stool that supports up to 300 lbs. The sleek, modern design includes a built-in toilet paper holder and a removable soft deflector shield. "
Save on Glasses
Search by Categories
Categories Arts and Crafts (59) Baby Carrier (5) Bags (10) Bath for Baby (21) Beauty (10) Biltmore (8) blogging (4) Books (107) Cloth Diapers (2) Clothing (Baby/Toddler) (47) Construction Theme Birthday (1) Coupon Codes (20) crock pot (1) dessert (1) Diaper Bags (7) Diaper Rash (3) Disney (6) DIY (12) Easter (7) Educational (40) fashion (1) Feeding (40) Food/Nutrition (39) For Dad (11) For Mom (122) Free Printables (12) Fun Ideas (315) Games (27) Gear (68) Gifts (134) Giveaways (824) Go Graham Go's Shop (1) Great Wolf Lodge (1) Green (62) Halloween (16) Handmade (3) Health Care (57) Holiday Gift Guide 2011 (10) Household items (50) How to Cloth Diaper (1) How to Make Baby Food (1) iPad (25) iPhone (62) Maternity Clothes (3) Morning Sickness (1) Movies (67) Music (51) Nursing (27) Organic (25) Organization (31) Parenting Tips (78) Personalized (29) Post Partum Care (4) Potty Training (7) Raising a Well-Mannered Child (16) Recipes (105) Safety (14) School (2) Shoes (Baby/Toddler/Kids) (36) Sippy Cups (6) Sleep (help with for babies) (12) Space Saver (11) Square Foot Gardening (6) Technology (31) Teething (4) Thanksgiving (2) The Ultimate Baby Registry Guide (1) Toys (150) Travel (7) Valentine's Day (8)