Savvy Mommy 7
Frankly, I was desperate. My son had landed on the dreaded "Do Not Promote" list barring him graduation from nursery school to preschool. Like most preschools in the US, Spencer's had a rule that children could not enroll until they were potty trained. In other words: No potty, no preschool. All my attempts to potty train him were failing miserably. I bribed him with treats, stickers, and toys. I bought different potty chairs, thinking he'd like one over the other. But in the end, nothing was working and he was becoming hostile and refusing to sit and even try. When I'd say, "Come on honey, let's sit and try to go pee-pee on the potty. He'd always reply, I don't want to or I don't need to, I'll go in 5 minutes or, maybe I try tomorrow."
As the deadline for preschool enrollment loomed, I became more and more desperate. To make matter worse, all of my son's little potty trained friends were being promoted to preschool, and he was about to be left behind--all because he couldn't go to the bathroom by himself. The clock was ticking and I needed a shortcut--fast. The time for drastic action was at hand!
2. How did you get the idea to write this book?
Necessity is the Mother of Invention. I had read one of the ways parents could teach a toddler to use the potty was to first guide a potty training doll or stuffed animal to use the potty. The question was, how could I get him to do this in a way that would be fun for both of us? I had already tried bribes and treats, so I knew I had to come up with an incentive that he would think was awesome.
And then it occurred to me like a flash of lightening; a party! All I had to do was say the word "party" and Spencer's eyes would light up. I would plan an all day party for the specific purpose of potty training him.
Kids love parties! In Toddler-Speak, a party means fun, games,cake, candy, presents and prizes. For a two- or three- year-old, it doesn't get any better than that. In Mom-Speak, a party is a fun way to motivate a child to learn a new behavior--in this case using the toilet. Giving a toddler motivation is critical to a parents success. Because when it comes to potty training, most kids have absolutely no incentive--none. And when you look at it from there perspective, why would they? Life experience has proven that it's fast, easy and convenient to go in their diapers.
3. What are your own personal experiences with potty training?
I have had thousands of parents potty train their child in one day. But I also have a lot of parents customize the program to the need of their child. Not every child needs to be potty trained in one day. A parent must always take into consideration the needs of the child. Whether you do the program in a day, weekend or over a couple of weeks-- is all fine. The ultimate goal should be to make the experience very enjoyable for the child.
To make the process exciting and fun, I have included a dozen detailed potty party themes, such as, the princess ball, teddy bear picnic, splish, splash, beach bash, all aboard train trip, and fun on the farm. Each theme is complete with suggestions for decorations, food and drinks, games, books, music, prizes and presents. To help you decide which theme potty party your child will find motivational and fun, I offer recommendations based on personality, preferences, and the concerns and fears your child has about using the potty.
4. How does it feel to have written such a successful book?
I am very proud to have been able to help other parents who are in the same tough spot I was in a few years ago. The book is already in its 3rd printing since being released in 3 months ago!
You also work with teens and youth programs that focus on positively achieving goals. How did you get started with that? Does your success inspire them to focus on their own personal goals?
I started working with victims of domestic violence. I would go into shelters and give speeches to help/encourage/inspire the women and children. I feel very passionate to help teens and youths achieve their goals and dreams. As Magic Johnson always says, "All kids need a little help, a little hope, and somebody who believes in them."
5. Have you ever had a funny or embarrassing experience being America's Potty Pro ?
Not Yet. :-)
6. What's once piece of advice you could give to moms going through potty training right now?
Go into potty training with an open mind. Please give my book a chance. If you have any questions and you'd like to contact me, please do so. My personal email is: tericrane@yahoo.com . I would be more than happy to spend as much time as you need discussing any of your concerns. And remember, I've heard it all.
Savvy Mommy 7
Sign Up - Get Savvy!
Want your pretty little princess or handsome prince to cruise down the streets in luxury? Here's your chance. Sign up for FREE Savvy Mommy Essentials news in your email and be eligible to win an exclusive Mutsy 4Rider Light Stroller prize package - worth more than $1,000 - by entering here .
Subscribe to our feeds
Subscribe to one of our feeds and get notified instantly whenever there is anything new on Savvy Mommy. Need help subscribing?
Favorites - Quick Shop
© 2002-2012 Savvy Mommy™ is a registered service mark of Victoria Pericon, Inc. All rights reserved. SavvyMommy.com does not carry inventory. All items featured are available for purchase at an online retailer. All of the product images found on SavvyMommy.com are used with permission from their respective owners. None of the maternity new mom baby toddler home decor maternity child mother children product reviews are paid placements. Website design and development by Studio814