Toddlers can be a real handful. They are old enough to express their own opinions and to demand what they want, but their physical and emotional development hasn't necessarily kept up. Hence, the huge tantrums toddlers are so famous for! Huggies is here to help you understand and cope with the toddler years, from recipes to tempt fussy toddler palates, to explanations for their sometimes baffling social behaviour, plus help with milestones such as toilet training. We also discuss toddler discipline and talk about your toddler's safety at home and out and about. You'll find lots of other useful information, including suggestions for toddler activities and tips for getting your active toddler to sleep. Not all toddlers are difficult, but if yours is at times, let Huggies help you survive those bad toddler days with both your sanity and sense of humour intact.
Toddlers are like sponges. They absorb everything going on around them, the good and the bad, including other children's tricks and tactics. This helps them develop both mentally and physically. As they progress through the toddler years, they become increasingly independent. From baby talk and actions through to becoming a small child , and, before you know it, preschool, toddlers are heaps of fun but also challenging from a parenting perspective. Huggies can help by sharing insights, knowledge and ideas regarding your toddler's social, physical and emotional development .
Are you and your toddler just about ready to say goodbye to nappies for good? If you are, then it's time to learn more on the subject of toilet training.
At first, toilet training (also known as potty training ) can seem a bit overwhelming for both you and your little toddler. But when you are both ready, the process can be both rewarding and fun. It can also be a memorable time, as your child is likely to say things about bodily functions that will make you laugh.
For some kids, toilet training seems natural and they sail through the process. For others it can be a journey full of ups and downs. But by being supportive, encouraging and patient, in time you'll have your child confidently using the potty and you can get rid of that nappy change table for good.
Your baby should be eating chunky food by the age of nine months. Try not to provide soft foods for too long or your bub might become fussy later on. Keep rotating the variety of foods you feed to your toddler and remember that just because they don't want something one day, it doesn't mean they won't eat it the next.