Toddler Child Care & Early Education Programs
Explore and Discover-Goin' Mobile
Your child's world is entirely new now that he is walking and we are excited to show him all its many wonders! In this period of rapid development, your active toddler is manipulating, moving and touching. He is becoming more independent and capable of doing things for himself. In our challenging and fun toddler program, your child's confidence will grow every day as he participates in a variety of experiences: art and sensory activities, joyful music and movement adventures and lots of active outdoor play.
Discovery Time : Your child's budding imagination will bloom in an environment containing equipment, materials and props that encourage play, language and discovery.  Your toddler can select materials and activities that interest him, so whether building with blocks, putting a puzzle together or experiencing creative art, your toddler will grow in confidence and knowledge.
Early Learning :  Your child's budding enthusiasm for learning will be nurtured through our theme-based curriculum which will provide a multitude of fun, age-appropriate experiences with language, colors, shapes and critical thinking skills.
Talk, Talk, Talk Your toddler's language is exploding as he uses both meaningful words and gestures to communicate his feelings and ideas to you,  his teachers and to other toddlers. Language experiences in the first two years of life lay the foundation for cognitive though and reading skills so our thoughtful teachers will not only always encourage your toddler's efforts to communicate but will also make communicating with them a regular and very important part of each and every experience.
More Words Please Even though your toddler is speaking some words now, there are often times when he is unable to express himself to his satisfaction or is unable to articulate his emotions or feelings.  Our Baby Signs ® program, a natural sign language program for hearing children will help to make all of his communication easier and more effective and give him a safe outlet for emotional expression.  You are certain to notice that it will be easier for you to communicate with your youngster-strengthening the bond you have with him.
Socialization : As your toddler learns more about himself and his abilities, he also becomes aware of others.  We will provide daily opportunities for group experiences where songs, fingerplay, movement activities and stories are introduced.  We will be there to nurture and guide him as his first friendships develop.
Growing Independence :  Your toddler's eagerness to be independent will make practicing self-help skills like hand washing, picking up and putting away toys, putting on a coat and sharing with others exciting and fun.  Your youngster will be so proud of himself as he learns to master many of these important milestones under the careful guidance of our skilled teachers.
Preparing for Potty Training Although children potty-train at their own pace, you and your child's teacher work together to provide the best environment for success.
Learning from Movement For your active toddler, movement is more than just a way of getting from one place to another; it's actually a way of learning.  Toddlers who are able to use their bodies to accomplish tasks and influence their environment feel a great sense of pride.  Our Fun With Fitness program will challenge your youngster with a myriad of physical activities and will surely  aid in his motor development.  Your entire family will be  included in the fun and learning, too: we'll send home additional activities and healthy recipes for the entire family to try.