minuteswest virginiaarchives and history commissionspring meetingfriday september 27 2012bavarian innshepherdstown west virginiachairman robert conte called the meeting to order at 9:30 a.m.
in addition to dr. conte other voting members present were becky frye victor greco by telephone and dr. joan walker
voting members absent were harold forbes dr. charles ledbetter bill richardson and noel tenney
ex officio voting members present were fredrick armstrong and dr. bill arnett
ex officio non voting members present were joe geiger director of archives and history serving as secretary to the commission dr. michael hohn director west virginia geological and economic survey jeremy morris president preservation alliance of west virginia susan pierce director historic preservation section ex officio non voting members absent were charles morris director museums section and randall reid smith commissioner of culture and history
also present was historic preservation staff member erin riebe
following introductions chairman conte asked for a motion on the meeting minutes of 2 june 2012
a motion to approve the minutes was made by dr. arnett with a second by dr. walker
mr. armstrong suggested several changes to the minutes including adding the word records in front of legislation on page 3 defining surface table projects on page 5 adding the information that a new appointments secretary had been appointed in the first paragraph on page 6 and changing the word preparing to assisting on the last line of page 7 chairman conte stated that he wished to modify the agenda and discuss the commission bylaws after the national register nominations and mr. armstrong stated that the quorum issue should be also discussed
he added that if a majority of voting members currently serving was required not enough were present to constitute a quorum
there being no further corrections or additions to the minutes of the 1 june 2012 meeting the motion with suggested revisions carried
chairman conte called upon mr. geiger for the archives and history report
mr. geiger referred members to information provided in the monthly reports for may through august 2012 copy attached to official minutes
he spoke about the success of recent lectures one of which drew nearly one hundred people and mentioned several upcoming events in the archives and history library
the state archives received several recent donations including the alexander messer letters which were digitized and placed on line and were the subject of a front page article in the charleston gazette a case file from the jefferson county circuit clerk ’s office relating to the mine wars trials and the john c. norman architectural drawings
mr. geiger related that the delayed state birth certificates more than 180,000 records had been placed on line and that the regional locations for the 2013 history bowl had been set
he also noted that in september he had spoken to students at the horace mann golden horseshoe club had delivered an address at the annual meeting of the greenbrier historical society and had done presentations on the archives and history website and collections to hundreds of students during constitution day
mr. geiger concluded his report by mentioning that the shifting of books and yearbooks on the third floor had been completed
mr. armstrong asked about the sesquicentennial marker project and was informed that the project is awaiting completion of the first two grants
staff met with division of highways staff to facilitate completion of the first two grants and to work on an agreement for the installation of private sponsor markers
following doh completion of the 300 markers 50 replacement markers will be installed and then work will commence on the sesquicentennial project
funding was approved for one marker relating to the civil war or statehood to be installed in each county
another grant will seek to fund 50 statehood and civil war markers throughout the state
mr. armstrong asked about the match for the highways grants and was informed that the legislative appropriation was being used to provide the match
mr. armstrong asked about the jefferson county virginia state line marker on us 340 and mr. geiger stated that the marker would be replaced as part of the next grant project
mr. armstrong asked about house bill 2278 dealing with state records and was informed by mr. geiger that he had met with majority leader boggs and voiced his concerns about the legislation
chairman conte then called upon ms. pierce for her presentation of the historic preservation report
ms. pierce referred to the report distributed to members copy attached to official minutes and discussed filling shpo positions work with the certified local government program and co hosting a commission assistance and mentoring program workshop
staff have also been working on development grants printing a newsletter and working on the 2013 calendar which will focus on significant people of the civil war
shpo ’s gis system is now available on line and the annual work program draft was sent out for public comment
staff have worked on review and compliance projects such as the moorefield wastewater treatment facility and the demolition of big creek high school and reviews of courthouses have increased due to grant applications to the courthouse facilities authority
an orientation for development grant recipients has been scheduled and a special telephone conference call meeting of the commission will be needed to expend clg funds before the end of the calendar year
mr. armstrong asked about the development grants
ms. pierce explained that three grants had been cancelled and stated the amount reflected an accrual of funds
mr. armstrong noted that courthouse facilities was doing a survey of the condition of west virginia courthouses and asked if shpo was involved
ms. pierce replied that she had served on an advisory committee to review the potential survey firms
mr. armstrong noted that the results of the survey may prove helpful in determining courthouse funding needs
mr. morris asked why two grants were cancelled and ms. pierce responded that one of the recipients could not wait and proceeded without shpo funding
in reply to mr. armstrong ’s question about the staats building in charleston ms. pierce stated that the survey and planning grant was cancelled and that the group intended to re apply
in the absence of charles morris no report was given on museums activities but a written report was distributed copy attached to official minutes
in the absence of commissioner randall reid smith no report was given on culture and history activities
turning to old business ms. riebe provided updates on national register nominations previously reviewed by the commission copy attached to official minutes
she noted that the dr. w. w. monroe house wood county had been listed in the national register on august 1 2012
turning to new business chairman conte called for the presentation of the national register nominations
edgefield greenbrier county nominated under criterion b agriculture with period of significance being 1935 1960 was presented by w. scott smith
dr. walker moved for approval of the nomination and mr. armstrong provided the second
motion carried
mr. geiger left the meeting and ms. pierce began serving as secretary at this point
old pine church hampshire county nominated under criterion c architecture with period of significance being 1838 was presented by sandra scaffidi
ms. frye asked about the foundation stones and ms. scaffidi stated field stones were added to prevent animals from getting under the building
mr. armstrong asked about activities in the church and ms. scaffidi responded that although regular services are not conducted activities are still held in the building
mr. armstrong asked about the boundary and he was informed it was the same as the 1838 deed and that several non contributing buildings are outside the boundary
mr. greco moved for approval of the nomination and dr. arnett provided the second
motion carried
capon chapel hampshire county nominated under criterion c architecture and criterion consideration a religious properties with period of significance being ca
1852 was presented by sandra scaffidi
ms. scaffidi introduced brenda hyatt trustee and caretaker who was present
dr. walker asked when the molding behind the altar was added
ms. hyatt stated that oral records note the church was formed in 1756 and that the molding was just a decorative treatment
dr. hohn asked about the attic opening and its visibility and ms. scaffidi indicated the opening was difficult to see
ms. frye moved for approval of the nomination and dr. walker provided the second
motion carried
valley view hampshire county nominated under criterion c architecture with period of significance being 1855 was presented by courtney fint zimmerman
ms. frye asked if the home is visible from the potomac eagle and ms. zimmerman stated that was a different home
mr. armstrong asked if the brick line on the wall in the office den was original
ms. zimmerman responded she was n’t sure if the plaster had been removed from the walls but ms. riebe stated that it does n’t affect the integrity
mr. armstrong stated the nomination could benefit from better source documentation
ms. zimmerman suggested better use of footnotes and mr. armstrong offered to provide his notations
dr. arnett moved for approval of the nomination and dr. walker provided the second
motion carried
springfield brick house hampshire county nominated under criterion c architecture with period of significance being ca
1855 was presented by courtney fint zimmerman
ms. frye praised the beautiful brickwork but disliked the painted brick in the back
dr. walker asked for clarification on the brick bonding and ms. zimmerman offered an explanation
ms. frye asked about the white area around the door and ms. zimmerman stated they believe it may have been part of the original entry porch
ms. pierce commented that the period of significance was 1855 but a lot of the provided information related to lord fairfax and was not relevant to the nomination
mr. armstrong moved for approval of the nomination with the condition that section eight be edited and dr. arnett provided the second
motion carried
seebert lane school pocahontas county nominated under criterion a ethnic heritage black and criterion a education with period of significance being ca
1898 1954 was presented by jean boger
mr. armstrong asked if she used state department of education reports and was informed by ms. boger she had
mr. armstrong asked about the cupola stating that he did n’t believe it was the original
ms. boger stated she was n’t certain but she believed it was original
ms. riebe stated that regardless the integrity was not affected
ms. frye asked if the interior doors were grained and was informed they were not
dr. hohn asked if they were painted and was informed they were not that they were natural wood
ms. pierce moved for approval of the nomination and dr. hohn provided the second
motion carried unanimously
pleasant green methodist episcopal church pocahontas county nominated under criterion a ethnic heritage black and criterion consideration a religious properties with period of significance being 1888 1962 was presented by jean boger
dr. conte asked if the parsonage was included in nomination to which ms. boger replied in the affirmative
mr. armstrong thought it was underrepresented in the nomination and ms. riebe suggested that section eight should further address the church complex
dr. walker moved for approval of the nomination and ms. frye provided the second
motion carried
spencer cemetery marshall county nominated under criterion c art and criterion consideration d cemeteries with period of significance being 1912 was presented by erin riebe
chairman conte ms. frye and dr. arnett noted that the nomination was unusual
the cemetery had been so overgrown that it was n’t visible until the land was recently cleared
mr. armstrong asked about the origin of the stump and was informed by ms. riebe that it probably had been ordered as they were in vogue at the time
mr. armstrong noted that the stump was unique for west virginia but disagreed with it being listed under art since it was commercially manufactured
he did not know if it qualified
dr. arnett moved for approval of the nomination and ms. frye provided the second
the motion carried with mr. armstrong voting against
all others voted in favor
buffington island battlefield boundary increase jackson county and meigs county ohio nominated under criteria a and d military and social history and criterion consideration f commemorative properties with periods of significance being 1863 and 1933 1934 was presented by erin riebe
ms. riebe stated that shpo was not provided an opportunity to review the draft but was presenting it on behalf of ohio shpo staff who could not attend
mr. armstrong asked what portion of the island was in west virginia and was informed the entire island was included in the state ’s boundaries
ms. pierce noted that ohio shpo had prepared the nomination but it was a cooperative effort with west virginia
mr. armstrong asked about past nomination efforts for this property and ms. pierce said that the ohio shpo has worked on this nomination for many years
mr. armstrong believed that the ohio shpo should have looked at previous controversies regarding the nomination and should have given the commission and the west virginia shpo more time to review it
dr. hohn asked if the nomination meets battlefield requirements of the national register and if anything else should be considered and he also noted that the date needs to be adjusted
ms. pierce mentioned the significance of the event of confederate entry into a union state and noted that ohioans are aware of the event
mr. armstrong stated he was unsure about the significance and he suggested tabling the nomination until further research could be done
ms. riebe questioned what he wanted to see changed and mr. armstrong expressed concern with the social history criterion
ms. riebe noted that social history is for the commemorative monuments added 1933 34 that were associated with the park
mr. armstrong noted that since morgan ’s raid involved four states perhaps the nomination should be considered national level of significance rather than state but ms. riebe disagreed
ms. pierce noted that there was quarry activity in the area and houses had been constructed but the area retained its integrity
dr. arnett moved for approval of the nomination and mr. greco provided the second
mr. armstrong abstained
motion carried
chairman conte then opened a discussion of commission by laws
in 2002 a revised version was passed by the commission with the intent of filing them as a procedural rule with the secretary of state ’s office but they were never filed
chairman conte noted that the secretary had e mailed a copy to commission members and asked if the commission should file the by laws as they are or revise further
mr. armstrong wanted to make sure the proposed by laws are in compliance with the open meeting law as interpreted today
dr. hohn asked if the division of culture and history had a lawyer and was informed by chairman conte they did not
chairman conte said he agreed to write a letter but culture and history staff indicated that the attorney general ’s office charges for their services
mr. armstrong said he spoke with legislative counsel who stated they believed a quorum required a majority of voting members
chairman conte stated that the by laws passed in 2002 required a majority of voting members currently serving
he added that an e mail from and a telephone conversation with the attorney general ’s office both upheld that a majority of voting members currently serving was necessary to constitute a quorum
dr. hohn and dr. arnett agreed that this would suffice for justification and suggested that the by laws be filed as a procedural rule
mr. armstrong made a motion that the archives and history commission secretary file the by laws as procedural rules with the secretary of state as previously approved on february 1 2002 by the commission to be posted for approval and public notice
mr. greco seconded and the motion carried
ms. pierce noted that a special meeting will have to be held in december
shpo will determine a date through e mail and will need a two week period for notice to the secretary of state
the winter meeting is scheduled for january 25 2013 in charleston
the spring meeting is scheduled to be held in elkins on may 31 2013 with june 7 as backup
dr. arnett made a motion to adjourn and chairman conte declared the meeting adjourned at 1:14 p.m.
respectfully submitted joseph n. geiger jr. secretary